This is Jocco podcast number 45 with echo Charles and me, Jocco Willink.
Good evening, echo. Good evening.
I often think that if I were an Indian, I would greatly prefer to cast my lot among those of my people who had here to the free open plane.
Rather than submit to the confined limits of a reservation, there to be the recipient of the blessed gifts of civilization,
when its vices thrown in without stint or measure.
And that is a quote from a book called My Life on the Plains published in 1876 by a guy named General Custer, who wrote that book or was published a few months before he died at the Battle of Little Big Horn.
But we're not going to look at that book today.
Even though that battle, the Battle of Little Big Horn is something we'll definitely delve into.
There's a ton of lessons learned there.
You know, a whole, all those, all the American soldiers were killed in this one unit of General Custers.
There was no survivors from it. He lost like 200 guys, all of himself included.
And it was, there was some survivors from some of the other companies that were along with him.
There's a guy named Major Reno and another guy named Kat and Benteen and they had people that survived in their company actually a lot of their company survived.
None of, none of Colonel Custer's or General Custer's true survived.
And as I was thinking about doing that battle, because there's so many good lessons to learn about a lot of lessons to learn about arrogance and overconfidence and splitting force.
There's just a really good bunch of good tactical lessons to learn from it.
And as I dove into it, I ended up coming across another firsthand account from an Indian.
Now, I use the term Indian because instead of the term Native American, which is probably the, which is the correct nomenclature, but in this book, that, that we're going to go over tonight.
It's from a Native American who name is Wooden Leg.
And throughout the book, he calls himself an Indian. He calls all of his fellow Native Americans, calls Moll Indians.
So you're going to hear me call him Indians throughout this evening.
Now, what I found though is as I wanted to learn more about the battle, I started getting into the whole Native American.
What they went through what they were like and that culture.
And so this book did a great job of kind of exploring that.
And this, this shi-yan warrior.
Like I said, named Wooden Leg and the name of the book is Wooden Leg, a warrior who fought custard.
But like I said, that's actually a small portion of the book, but it gives us some good insight as to what life was like for these Native Americans back on the planes in that transitional period.
Where they were going from being living open on the planes to getting moved on to reservations and some of the fighting that they did and how they grew up.
Now, where this came from, there was the author of this book, who was a guy that was a doctor and served a few months as an agency physician for the Northern Shians.
So that's the tribe that was allied with the Su Indians and they were around and part of the annihilation of custard.
And this doctor, Dr. Marquis actually learned the language.
And so when he was up there living on the reservation, he would constantly ask, you know, hey, didn't anyone fight custard?
Was any around for these battles? We just just not just custard, but he's, you know, specifically interesting that one since it was no.
I witnessed survivors from the American side. He wanted to find out what happened.
And as he interviewed all these different Indians, eventually got to this guy, Wooden Leg.
And I'll go to the book here. It says Wooden Leg became the author's favorite narrator.
It seemed that his lifetime biography should surround his special battle story so that readers might learn what kind of people were the hostile Indians of that day.
So this is again, Marquis. It's a doctor living up on the reservation and working on people and learn the language, communicated with him.
And one of his favorite old time warriors that he talked to was this guy by the name of Wooden Leg.
And I'll start with how he ended up with that name Wooden Leg.
And I'm going to the book.
This crow, Cheyenne, Indian man, was a wonderful traveler on foot.
Even as a boy, he could outwalk and wear down most of the young men who journeyed with him.
His capabilities in this regard were so noticeable that people said his legs must be made of wood.
Since he never becomes tired, then they fixed upon the name Wooden Leg.
I was also a youthful wonder in the matter of walking.
By this is Wooden Leg himself talking. So he was describing someone else who is actually a relative of his.
And he was talking about himself. By the time I was 15 years old, I could go all day following in the footsteps of my Uncle Wooden Leg.
I was tall and gone and I grew taller and young manhood.
Friends began jokingly to apply me the name of this endearing of during and during Uncle.
Who then had become a middle aged or elderly man.
I liked the name. I liked the man who bore it.
And I liked the honor of comparison with him.
I told my father I wish to be known as Wooden Leg.
It was a common custom to pass down names to junior relatives.
My father told me that when the time was right, he would confer that new name upon me.
The time came when I was about 17 years old.
So that's where the origin of his name comes from.
We're going to get to the part where he actually takes the full name and that becomes his name Wooden Leg.
It's after an eventful. We'll say an eventful time period.
So here's some a little bit about being raised out there against Cheyenne country.
When I was six years old, I asked my father will you give me a horse?
Yes, you may have any horse in mind that you want, but you must catch him.
He gave me a raw-hide, lary at rope.
So there you go. Yo, you want a horse? Cool.
Here's a rope. Go catch one.
He and my mother and some other people laughed about it, but I took the matter seriously.
With the lary at looped and coiled, I went out among the herd to search for horses belonging to my father.
So he goes out. He finds a small pony.
Eventually he gets it. He captures it.
And when it quieted down, I followed carefully along the line, talking soothingly until it allowed me to pad its neck.
After a while, I got its mouth around the lower jaw, the loop of the raw-hide, according to the old Indian way of making a bridal.
When it had calmed after this new advance, I began to make strokes on its back.
Then I took the long coiled into my belt, the same as I had seen men do, and I climbed quickly upon the animal.
It shied, and I fell off, but I still had my rope, this uncoiling from my belt as the pony moved away.
I seized the tether and followed again its guidance to the coveted mount, more petting and soothing talk, another attempt at riding, off again.
Before making a third try, I spent a long time at the gentle, taming procedures.
Nevertheless, the pony shied and then bucked after I had mounted it, but I grabbed its mane and stuck to my seat within a few minutes,
I had control. I rode to my father's lodge.
Yes, that is your pony to keep, he told me.
Bands of us boys went out at times on horseback to hunt wolves. We had only bows and arrows.
We killed many wolves with arrows. My father had given me a good bow in a supply of arrows when I was nine or ten years old.
We were then in black hills countries, country.
I know we have people in America definitely that still are hunting at a very young age, but it's pretty cool that you're six years old,
breaking horses and then out hunting with bows and arrows by the way hunt wolves.
It's awesome.
So back to the book. My mother said to me, we have no meat.
Another boy and I set off to hunt. We were about the same age 15 years old.
We each had on a shirt, leggings and moccasins, all of buck skin or other skin.
The leggings had no seat in them as was the Indian way of clothing the lower limbs.
We had no head coverings nor any mittens for our hands.
Although we are accustomed to hardship, this was a cold day for us.
We waited and wallowed through snow up to our knees and thighs.
So again, nowadays we got smart wool hats and Gore-Tex jackets.
We just got it so easy.
And here you go. You're in moccasins.
And you got bare ass. You got to bare ass and you're just out with some leggings on.
Just get after it and knee deep snow.
Just hardcore. Hardcore.
It goes a little old. They continue this hunt and then back to the book.
I dear jump out and start looking us.
The first shot from my rifle brought it down.
We rushed it and cut it through.
We hurriedly cut open the body and jammed our hands inside to get warm.
Yeah.
The show's shownies, the crows and the ponies were tribes.
We fought most during my time of growing up to manhood.
So this is another thing that they talked about a lot in this book is that
the Native Americans were fighting each other all the time.
They were at war.
They were at war with each other.
And he talks about that a lot.
Back to the book. My own youthful warrior experiences were mostly in combat against the crows and the show
showies.
One incident out of many in this kind of warfare will show you how it was carried on.
A band of showtakes came at night and stole some of our horses.
We were camped on a divide between the upper part of the tongue river and the little big horn.
Snow deep and winter weather.
I was 16 years old. I went with a party of shions who took the trail of the thieves.
After traveling all day and into the night we found a small camp of showshonies.
Most of them alarmed by their dogs had fled when we made our attack upon them.
But repeated shots kept coming from a single certain lodge.
We concentrated our assault on this lodge.
Two shions were killed and another one mortally wounded before we could suppress this destructive defense.
White wolf, 11 years older than I,
was then I was and yet living as my neighbor on Tong River was the brave warrior who dealt the final blow to that showshone.
White wolf crept along the ground into the lodge.
He had in his right hand a six shooter.
It was totally dark in there and he fumbled about the interior seeking whomever he might find.
His gun bumped into somebody and he pulled the trigger.
Later developments re-evealed this is the only occupant of the lodge.
The victim was an old man. He was the only shoshone we killed in that fight so far as we could learn.
But we won the battle and got back on our horses.
We cut up the body of the old shoshone man.
We cut off his hands, his feet, his head.
We ripped open his breast and belly.
I stood there and looked at his heart and liver.
We tore down the lodge built a bonfire of its contents and piled the remnants of the dead body upon this bonfire.
We stayed there until nothing was left but ashes and coals.
So these guys are getting after it.
They're definitely up.
And which really cool is like,
I didn't want to break up this but you know you've got to soul- happening.
This could be a story about American soldiers going against Taliban fighters in Afghanistan or in Surgeons in Iraq.
We're taking down a small village and there's people and there's enemy in there.
And they're building and there's concentrated fire coming from there.
And you get a guy that low crawls up.
This is just a straight warfare.
It's amazing how that story could translate until most modern era with when you have guns.
Except the part where they cut off the hands and the head.
Except for the part where they cut off the hands, cut off the head, rip open the breast and the belly.
Yeah.
They're taking it to a different level right there.
And you know I think it's...
He put that in there.
I mean he's telling these stories and it offers you an insight as to what their attitude was and what they're going to do if you got captured.
Yeah.
It's on.
Back to the book.
Little Wolf had been a big tribal chief.
The most influential one for about two years before that time.
And his earlier manhood, he was for a long time chosen over and over again as the leading chief of the elk or your society.
If during any time any shyan was looked upon as the bravest of man of all, he was the man.
He was never afraid to speak the truth.
The people all believed in him.
He was a gentle and charitable man but if insulted to anger he was likely to hurt somebody.
In either disturbed or undisturbed mood everybody knew he meant just what he said.
He was my uncle by marriage.
One of his two wives being a sister of my father.
He used to tell me many thrilling stories both at his lodge and my father's lodge.
I recall one in particular when he had hand-to-hand combat with a shoshone.
Each had a sheath knife.
They grappled and wrestled and slashed one another.
Finally, Little Wolf pinned in the arms of the shoshone through him to the ground, plunged upon him and stabbed him to death.
He gave me a great deal of good advice both as to warfare and as to how to carry myself up rightly as a man among my own.
My conduct all throughout my life has been influenced by his teachings more than by those of any other preceptor except my own father.
So that's Little Wolf.
Little Wolf was the badass.
Little Wolf was the big badass.
And I thought it was important to kind of talk about his characteristics.
He spoke the truth. People believed him. He was gentle and charitable.
But if he was angered, he was going to hurt you.
So this is the guy that they choose as their leader.
Back to the book.
I think my body grew more rapidly than my mind did.
This is not uncommon for men and boys.
Right? Your body grows before your mind does absolutely back the book. By the time I was 18 years old, I was the tallest men of the tribe.
I believe there were two who stood a little above me. Both of these were killed in the great battle against the soldiers of Custer.
My friend, the white man, doctor measures me now at six feet, two inches and weighs me at 235 pounds.
So we're talking about a big dude.
Wooden leg was no joke.
I don't know. I grew up in New England.
When you go to old houses in New England that were built in the 1700s,
I don't know if you know this, but the ceilings are lower.
The doors are lower because people were shorter.
Like all people were shorter.
Can you imagine being where the average height is probably 5-5 and Wooden leg is 6-2 monster guy?
So now they're, they're, you talk a little bit about just again this continuing on with his life living in the black hills.
Here we hunted the game and the enemy grows and shoshones.
And here we lived in every way the life of the planes Indians of those times.
It was not an idol existence.
We were busy much of the time fighting our enemies, gathering food and clothing and sheltering skins.
As we were camped on the lower tongue river when I was about 9 years old, one morning a herald started to cry out.
All of our horses are gone.
They're followed a lively stir among the young men.
A party of them mounted on a few horses that had been overlooked by the raiders and hurried away on the trail.
A thin snow helped them.
In the late afternoon they called up with the lost herd apparently abandoned.
But after a search of the vicinity they discovered that somebody was in a canyon cave there.
One of the shiands crawled into the cave in an endeavor to verify the supposition.
The verification came in the form of an arrow that hit him in the right eye.
He quickly backed out.
Everybody bring wood the shiand leader ordered.
They built a fire at the cave's opening.
With blankets they fan the flames and the smoke into the hole.
The prisoners fan outward and thrust sticks at the fire heap to push it away.
Bring more wood the leader called.
The one-sided contest went on until the two crow-endied men burst out from the cave.
Almost suffocated and indesparation.
The first one was beaten and stabbed a death by their surrounding shiands.
The second one got past them spraying upon one of their horses and dashed away.
The shiands pursued him.
He happened to mount a slow animal, so it was not long before the chase developed into a beating by ponywips and handles.
The crow suddenly jerked his mount to his sand still.
At the same moment he flashed out his sheath knife and made a vicious sideways stab.
The blade buried itself from the breast of a shiand who fell dead.
The other shiands rushed upon the crow in a twinkling.
He had received many death blows from various weapons.
Somebody scouted them and they caught off his feet.
Hands and head.
Again, it's interesting.
What do they do? They got a guy in a situation.
They got him trapped in a cave.
How do they get him out of there?
What do we do nowadays?
Maybe we throw some tear gas in there.
What do they do?
They build a fire, smoke them out.
A little bit more about the life of the shiands.
Competitive sports used to interest us.
Horse races, foot races, wrestling matches, target shooting with guns or arrows,
tossing the arrows by hand, swimming, jumping or other light contest were entered upon.
The tribe's competition was usually between men representing the three warrior societies.
Inside the tribe there were three separate warrior societies.
Like three different clubs basically.
Back to the book, these were the elk warriors, the crazy dog warriors and the fox warriors.
If any suetribe or big band camp, jointly or big band, jointly camp,
the matches were between representatives of the two tribes.
That's where made on every kind of contest.
The stakes were of guns, ammunition, bows, arrows, blankets, horses, robes, jewelry, shirts,
leggings, moccasins, everything in the line of personal property.
The betting always was on even terms.
Articles were piled upon a blanket, matched articles and opposition to another.
The winners took all and shouted over the victory.
So these guys were heavily involved in competition, because competition makes you better.
This reminds me of the seal teams like everything in the seal teams competition.
I don't care what you're doing.
Your buddies say, hey, you want to go for a just a mellow run on the beach.
You know, yeah, sure, no problem.
As the next thing you're throwing up from the end because you're pushing each other so hard.
Every thing, every time you get on the range, it's a shooting contest.
Every time you go, everything you do is you go for a skydive.
Oh, how close did you get to the T when you land?
So everything is a contest and that's how these guys are doing.
This is what keeps them sharp.
Back to the book, a good wrestler and general strongman was Little Hawk.
And so this one here, Little Hawk, and a guy named Buffalo Hump and Brave Wolf,
they go around and they meet up with another tribe.
And they roll in and he says, we need meat.
They announced, you're drying poles are too full and we think our wants can be supplied here.
Little Hawk wants to wrestle for it.
If anybody here can throw them, we shall not take any food from this lodge.
Nobody wanted to accept this challenge.
The young men took some meat and went on to another T.P.
There, they made the same kind of announcement in proposition.
They're likewise all the men present fear to grapple with Little Hawk.
And they're also the three joking robbers help themselves from the Bountiful Store.
At the next T.P., the transaction was more complex.
After some exchange of talk, the spokesman of the lodge said, Big thigh is here.
He says he will wrestle you.
Now I'll tell you right now.
I don't want to wrestle Big thigh.
Right?
Big thigh sounds like he's got some game.
The conditions of the match were agreed upon, but two men stripped to their breach cloths.
A group of onlookers assembled, the group soon became a great crowd.
Big thigh and Little Hawk appear equally confident.
Both of them rushed into the grapple.
They tugged and shoved and tripped.
The advantage seemed to shift back and forth.
The throng of spectators whooped and danced.
There was some part of his ensuring, but most of it was merely the expression of delight
as witnessing this tribal championship battle.
After several minutes of fierce and continuous struggling, Little Hawk began to weaken and wilt.
Big thigh, pinion the arms of his antagonist and bore him face downward to the ground.
Got his back.
The victor sat astride the back of the vanquished and sprinkled handfuls of dirt upon him.
He also picked up a folded blanket nearing by nearby and used this as a soft club and pretense
at a beating into complete submission.
The defeated Little Hawk.
That's a legit jujitsu match right there.
Got the back.
Got the back mount.
Got the submission.
Well, he took it a little far with the rolled up blanket.
Yeah, but it was still only a blanket.
He was being cool about it.
He didn't cut his head hands and feet off the floor.
Yeah, that's for sure.
So another thing that's interesting is just how they were organized and their leadership,
the way they were set up.
So here we go back to the book.
The warrior societies were the foundation of tribal government among the shiands.
That is the number, the members of the warrior societies elected the chiefs who governed the people.
Every 10 years, the whole tribe would get together for the special purpose of choosing 40 big chiefs.
These 40 would then select four past chiefs or old men chiefs to serve as supreme advisors to them and the tribe.
There were not any hereditary chiefs among the shiands.
So that's a pretty cool system.
I like that system.
I think I like that system better than our system right now.
They end up, they kind of elect 40 chiefs.
And then from those 40 chiefs, those 40 chiefs take three more or four more to make the old men chief.
So at one point, they decide that they're going to move camp, which they do from time to time.
And they, the leaders in the morning, they make an announcement.
And here it is.
All shiands open your ears and listen.
Tomorrow morning we move to Tung River.
Have your lodges down and yourselves and horses ready.
The fox warriors will lead us.
The next morning, as we all prepared for the move, the fox warriors assembled out forward in the direction of the intended movement.
The old man heralded, instructed them.
You are the leaders today.
Make all the people obey you.
Make them stay in their proper places.
If any of them disobey our ordinary rules of travel, you may pony whip them.
You may shoot their horses. You may kill their dogs.
You may break their guns or their bows.
You may punish them in any way that seems to you best, except you are not allowed to kill any shiain.
So that's one of the rules you're going to hear that throughout.
They're not allowed to kill each other no matter what.
And you know, this is kind of an iron hand way of ruling.
Hey, if you get out of line on this road march, we're going to do.
You're going to feel the pain.
So they're not going to get much resistance.
Now, speaking of weapons and you've heard him talk about breaking bows.
And this is just kind of giving you some insight on what they use for weapons.
The arrow was the preferred weapon on a tribal hunt in Buffalo herd.
Or on a large party, we're joined in pursuit.
Each rider shot arrow after arrow into whatever animal was convenient to him during the tumult of the running chase.
When it ended, he had one or two more arrows in various dead buffalo scattered over the area by the flight of the herd.
Every man kept his own arrows and always marked in some peculiar manner nearby they could be identified.
So when the field was reviewed after the termination of the killing, he could find out which buffalo he had killed or it helped the kill.
It could be learned in such instance which arrow was the fatal one and which were of little or no importance.
Thus the claims to the skin and meat could be settled.
In case of a disagreement, the chiefs decided to question.
Gun bullets could not be distinguished from one another, so the guns were used only when one man was hunting alone or when a small party of special friends hunted together.
The guns also had to have powder and lead and caps which we did not always have on hand.
We could make arrows or we often recovered them from the dead animal.
So that's just imagine you go these big herd of buffaloes and bunch of Indians go in there.
They're shooting them with all these just shoot every animal you see.
You try and shoot them and eventually find out which ones are dead.
You check that matter of mine got him in the heart that gets a meat there.
That's cool.
So other people like me knew and you know 40 other guys were shooting.
Just shooting.
10 arrows in there.
8 different guy shot this one.
We all get it.
And then they can just they can tell oh it out and hit the heart.
So you're the main guy, you know.
Thanks.
You get the skin.
Yep.
Okay.
Other weapons spears were used by the shyans.
The long and slender points might be of metal or they might be of stone or bone.
Great care was taken in its coloring and general design.
The Sue had knife sticks for fighting.
These had long shafts.
The same as a spear but instead of the attached point at the end,
there were three blades at the shaft side.
So that's kind of a unique looking weapon.
Yeah.
It kind of sounds mad, maxish.
A long spear with three knives sticking on it.
Yeah.
Hweins kind of had that two.
Well it's a little differently put the shark.
The shark teeth.
So it's like a yeah it's pretty dope.
Actually don't want to get hit with the shark teeth.
And not know.
Talking about a little bit of the dress.
The earrings of an Indian often indicated his tribal
stock.
A shyan ear had but one piercing.
Only one ring.
And this ring was looped directly through or close up to the ear.
The Sue wore necklaces regularly in single strands.
Eagle feathers stuck up from the back hair of many a Sue.
The number of such feathers were worn by anyone man was supposed to note the number of enemies he had killed.
The shyans never adopted this custom.
All the best clothing was taken along with him when any warrior were to set out in search for a conflict.
The articles were put into a special bag ordinarily a beautifully breed beaded buck skin pouch.
But perhaps a raw hide one.
And this was slung at one side of this horse.
The bag also contained extra moccasins beaded moccasins.
More bonnets, paints, a mirror, special medicine projects or anything else of this nature.
If a battle seemed about to occur, the warriors first in important preparatory act was to jerk off all his ordinary clothing.
He then heard we got out his fine garments.
If he had time to do so he rebraided his hair.
Pain it his face and his own peculiar way.
Did everything needful to prepare himself for presenting his most splendid personal appearance.
That is he got himself ready to die.
The idea of full dress and preparation for battle comes not from a belief that it will add to the fighting ability.
The preparation is for death.
In case that should be the result of the conflict.
War bonnets were not worn by all warriors.
In fact, there are only a few such distinguished men in each warrior society of our tribe.
It was expected that one should be a student of the fighting art for several years or else that he'd be an unusually apt learner before he should put the crown of eagle feathers.
He then did so upon his own initiatives.
Or perhaps because the commendurary urgings of his seniors.
The actmen of profession of fully acquired ability in warfare.
A claim of special accomplishment in using cunning and common sense and cool calculation coupled with the bravery attributed to all warriors.
So if you want to get that big badass headdress, I thought it's pretty interesting.
You give it to yourself.
Now people can tell you should you deserve it.
But you make the claim.
You say, you're up on the man.
And it's interesting.
I'm going to read those again.
It means you have acquired ability in warfare in using cunning, common sense, cool calculation coupled with bravery.
Very, very good definition of a warrior, right?
Back to the book, the whereer was supposed never to ask mercy in battle.
If some immature young man pretended to such high standing before it seemed to his companions that he ought to do so, he was twisted and shamed into awaiting his proper time.
I first put on my war bonnet when I was 33 years old, 14 years after I had quit the roaming life.
After a man had been accepted as a war bonnet man, he remained so throughout his lifetime.
War chiefs and tribal chiefs ordinarily were war bonnet men.
But this was not a requirement for these positions.
Pure modesty might keep the bravest and most capable fighter from making the claim.
Also, and admittedly worthy wearer of the war bonnet might not be chosen for or might refuse all official positions.
The head, the feathered headpiece then was not a sign of public office.
It was a token of individual and personal feeling as to his own fighting capabilities.
Interesting. It's interesting that he obviously thought about the fact that some guys were too humble to claim the war bonnet.
And he actually says some of the best and bravest and most capable of a hundred of deserve, which is in keeping with what we know about humility being the trait and the most critical trait of someone's sick.
And it's also interesting that some of the people that were great fighters weren't necessarily going to be good leaders.
That's a reality.
Reality to this day.
There's a little bit about the way they treat each other.
Fighting between shians, either man or woman, women was forbidden by the tribal laws.
In case of a fight, some chief near at hand would call out warrior, separate these fighters and whip them.
The warrior policeman then on duty would respond to the call.
A band of them would give such punishment as seem to them fitting.
If the fighters renewed their strife, they might have punishment added.
Might have their TPs torn down, their horses killed, property damage done to them in some other way, any suitable and sufficient punishment.
Except no policeman warrior nor anyone else could lawfully kill a shian.
Pony whips, either the lashes or the heavy stick handles were not customary attacking weapons in a personal fight.
Shians did not use fists as white people do.
Not often did any two women fight.
If they did, they merely scratched and pulled hair.
It was more of a comic show than an alarming sight to see two women clawing each other.
I never heard of any shian, woman killing another, normal, viciously killing a man, nor did the men kill women.
I used to hear old people talk about a shian named Wounded Elk who had beaten his wife and then shot her, killing her.
I never heard of any other case like that.
The incident happened before I was born.
Suicides were not uncommon among us.
Men shot themselves, women hung themselves.
Foolish ones, yet do such acts.
It's interesting you says that the shians did not use their fists as white people do.
You think we're talking straight grappling?
Yeah, no strikes.
Or is he saying that they struck in a different way?
Maybe they want to break their hands.
It's a pretty smart move.
Again, a little bit more culture.
This is one of the little stories.
Two youths, brothers, found one time a wolf's den.
One of them took his lary at and crawled into the hillside cave to get pups.
He felt about in the darkness got the rope about a pups hindfeet and dragged it out.
They knocked it in the head and he went in after another one.
This time either a pup or an old wolf bit his hand.
He retreated.
Outside he got a forked stick with this projecting out in front of him he returned to attack upon the wolves.
The forked end, the forked end got engaged in the hair and skin of the wolf.
The youth twisted and tugged backing out and dragging after him the snarling and snapping animal.
The brother stood with his rifle poised and ready to shoot.
Lims have brushed averted his arm and the bullet crashed into the head of the other boy.
The shocked and weeping brother put the dead body on a horse and took it to their home lodge.
People flock to sea and hear.
You killed him in anger.
Somebody accused.
No, it was an accident he saw about and he explained how it had occurred.
A group of warrior policemen went with him out to the wolf's den and there he refers for their observation all the incidents of the happening.
They became fully satisfied that he had no intention to kill his brother that it was truly accidental.
The youth was released with no penalty whatsoever.
Got a little blue on blue there.
Even the Native Americans experience the blue on blue situations in the chaos and confusion.
It's pretty, you know, you think about two little kids crawling to a cave to kill wolves into a wolf den.
That's awesome.
The warrior culture, pure warrior culture.
I love it.
Now we get into, I guess, I guess you'd call it their religion.
Right.
And they call it the great medicine is what is what Woodenleg refers to.
And I think the best, as I looked up and tried to research what they mean by the word medicine.
I think the closest thing I got is sort of like spirit, spirit, spirituality, spirit that's kind of the word that it means to me is I try to figure out exactly what it meant.
I don't know if there's a great, but you can see from the context what he means but.
So here we go back to the book.
I made medicine for the first time when I was 17 years old and 1875.
To make medicine is to engage upon a special period of fasting, thanksgiving, prayer and self denial even of self torture.
The procedure is an entirely devotional exercise.
The purpose is to subdue the passions of the flesh and to improve the spiritual self.
The bodily abstinence and the mental concentration upon lofty thoughts cleanses both the body and the soul and puts them into or keeps them in health.
Then the individual mind gets closer toward conformity with the mind of the great medicine above us.
So that's just awesome.
He's talking about fasting, he's talking about focusing on larger things, he's talking about punishing yourself and and you know he's the term self torture.
This is disciplined.
So he goes to his medicine man.
I need red hair bear, red hair bear.
I want to make medicine.
I told him how he responded in couragely and that's not a question. It's like the statement of how.
How he responded in couragely. What number of days do you think you can endure?
The whole four days I replied confidently.
How he quote, I will help you.
So he's going to ask that's the, I guess that's the max limit that they go as a four straight days.
So it's four straight days by the way on your own no food, no water.
That's what the deal is.
And you bear the elements you can have like a little tent, but you're going to bear the elements.
As he's preparing to do it, here we go back to the book.
The medicine man painted my whole body.
Red clay mixed into water and the dish was used for most of the painting.
With the black paint he made first a circle about my face, including the forehead, the chin and the cheeks.
Black wristlets and black ankleats were next form.
On the middle of my breast he painted a black son.
On my left shoulder blade he put a black mood.
This is going to be a hard trial for you. The hardest trial you've ever had.
Throughout the four days you will have neither food nor water, your desires will distress you.
Other distresses may be piled upon these.
You may retreat now and postpone it for another time if you want to do so.
What say you?
I dread it, I confessed, but I know it will not kill me.
I do not want to wait, I want to go on right now.
I shall keep my courage from failing by fixing my thoughts upon being a good man.
Legit.
Going into the ceremony a little bit, here he is.
Hot thirsty, yet more hot and more thirsty.
I prayed particularly for the strength of body and firmness of heart to carry me through to the end of the trial.
I loaded my pipe for a sourcing smoke, but it was not a solace.
The heat burned my already parchment tongue.
I tried to sleep. Maybe I did sleep, I do not know.
I made attempts to meditate quietly.
I do not know whether I was actually thinking or was following dreams racing through my minds.
Mind.
All I could be sure about was that I was either sitting down or lying down all the time.
And by the way, when they smoke, the pipe from what I could figure out, they're pretty much smoking generally tobacco with sometimes other herbs that they sometimes would mix with a tobacco.
Willow bark, sue Mac, white sage, just kind of other plants and herbs.
Back to the book, oh, how lonely I was.
I loaded and lit my pipe. No, it was not good. My mouth and throat were burning water.
Water.
But the great medicine sees me. I kept thinking. My thoughts were old and chased each other rapidly in circles.
I dreamt that I heard the footsteps of a horse.
Hey, wooden leg. Hey. This is the day.
Happiness almost filled my heart. The only hindrance was in the thirst and the hot body.
After I had been let out, we smoked together. It was a torture to my tongue, but I did not complain.
We went then to my father's lodge in the camp. My father called out an invitation to Old Men, friends.
They came and sat in a circle upon the robe spread over the lodges floor. I sat with them by the side of my father.
My mother brought a bucket full of water and set it off a little distance from me.
I suppressed a strong desire to plunge my face into it, but I could not keep my eyes from staring at it.
Wouldn't leg. You have been four days without water. Now you may drink four sips.
I seized the sides of the bucket. The four sips were four long, drawn mouthfuls.
I waited for more advice. Wouldn't leg. You have been four days without meat.
Take four sliced off bites, one for each day of the fast.
I selected a chunk from the plate. I stuck the end of it far into my mouth, and with a sheath knife I cut it off.
I was the chewing was vigorous, and I soon had it swallowed.
The chunk was pushed to second time into my mouth, and it's end to cut off there.
A third and fourth mouthful were taken in the same manner. After a few minutes more meat was allowed to me.
Then still more. All I cared to eat, it was the best meat I ever tasted.
I talked about that the other day. The recalibration of knowing what it's like to actually feel hungry and then how good food tastes when you have an eaten for a while.
Taste good. That's what he's feeling the best meat he ever tasted right there, boom.
Now that's one little ceremony that he went through.
He does some more of that. The second medicine experience he does was about a month after that one.
And he did two days instead of four.
So it's something that you kind of, these warriors who kind of continually keep up with.
And back to the book here.
First, third season of warrior discipline.
I went one morning at dawn to the top of the hill. There I fasted, prayed, meditated, and dreamed all day.
Another disciplinary means for subduing the flesh was to stand upright all day from sunrise to sunset on a hill.
The devotee did not move during that time except to keep his face turned at all times towards the sun.
He might keep his eyes closed or shaded, but his countenance had to be presented ever towards the veterinary token of the great medicines existence.
He prayed or otherwise kept his thoughts fixed on a high plane.
This system of self-denial was varied by attitude taken.
One might stand all day or sit in one position all day or lie down during all the time,
but the attitude assumed at the beginning must be kept to the end.
My all day supplications were made while sitting down.
Standing upright in water from sunrise to sunset was one way of putting the body under the rule of the spirit.
The water had to be up to the neck or the upper breast.
Not any drink of it was taken.
It was not permissible to move the body except for keeping the face towards the sun.
So just go get in the water.
These guys are in Montana.
They're in Montana.
It's not cool.
It's interesting that all different military units do this kind of stuff.
Just going out and standing in a tension which they make you do in the military, which is when you're standing erect with your hands at your side.
You're moving.
You do that for hours and hours and hours.
It's interesting.
It's like that's not just a coincidence.
You know what I mean?
There is a discipline there.
There's a discipline of the body in doing that and it puts you in touch with your soul.
You stand there long enough and then like go through shield training.
You don't think you spend some time neck deep in water.
Just just waiting in a deep cold and enduring absolutely.
Yeah man, yoga can kind of be that.
You know like certain poses.
I mean to compare the distance.
The magnitudes different.
Yeah, definitely.
You're doing that.
You're doing it like wall sits.
Yeah.
That's another one man where it feels physical.
But at the end of the day it's mental.
Yep.
Like you just want to be okay.
I'm done.
But you just think you don't.
You can endure it.
But it's gonna take a lot.
Yeah.
The wall sits are paying for a lot.
It's a lot of mental after a while and then he goes on to say,
The bodily torture incident to the full standard.
Great medicine dance.
What the white people call the Sundance was the most severe test of hardy hood.
So it was looked upon as the highest form of self-skurging.
I never undertook this extreme step.
So the Sundance if you don't know anything about that,
it's like a multi day.
Fast with physical exertion with like borderline self-tours.
Like didn't appear things and slay the skin open.
I mean, it's hard core and it got banned for a while and it would known.
The natives don't want people to like watch it or record it because it's their own personal thing.
So anyways, you could probably do more research on it's called the Sundance.
But they do all kinds of really, really hard.
Of course, I've been just, you know,
devastating hard stuff to go through that hardens your soul up.
And then, is one more interesting thing here.
Back to the book.
The face painting as it was done for me by Red Herred Beer,
Bear at my first medicine making was adopted as my fixed mode of battle preparation in this regard.
It was a black ring about my face, including lower forehead, chin and cheeks in its circle.
All of the surface enclosed in that circle was painted yellow.
I kept that all times right at hand a supply of charcoal and yellow clay paint.
It did not take long for me to apply them when an occasion for their need might come.
With this preparation with my best clothing, my shield, my eagle wingbone whistle,
myself and my horse protected by the grass seed medicine, I was almost fearless.
I was not entirely so, but almost.
And every time of danger, I tried to keep myself thinking the great medicine sees me.
Now, there's a note, a historical note that's written.
Now it's going out of the out of wooden legs voice and it's going into a doctor marquee,
the translator and he's going to put a little note here and I'm going to read it back to the book.
In December 1875, pursuant to our governmental policy, General Sherman then commander-in-chief of the United States Army issued an important general order.
He proclaimed that all Indians found off the reservations after the last day of January 1876 would be regarded as hostels to be fought by military forces.
It being evident that not many of the Dakota roamers in Montana would return to reservations until they were forced to do so.
Theities of soldiers were set in motion for seeking out and driving these wanderers back within their assigned territorial bounds.
The active military field leaders in this campaign were Brigadier General Terry, Brigadier General Crook, Colonel Gibbon and Lieutenant Colonel Custer.
These four officers had been bravetted, major general of volunteers during the Civil War. And what that bravetted means that it's like you get a temporary promotion to fill a billet, but you're not getting paid for it.
And then after it, you get put back.
But the contracting of the Army after the war set each of them back to a lower ranking.
Terry had infantry from Fort Rice and Custer's seventh cavalry from Fort Lincoln, Dakota.
Crook had a force of cavalry and infantry at Fort Fetterman, Wyoming.
Gibbon had infantry from Fort Shaw and cavalry from Fort Ellis, Montana.
From there, three basic points in Dakota and Wyoming and Montana, the three bodies of soldiers moved towards a common central area between powder,
and big horn rivers in Montana, where the Indians being sought were roaming.
The details of these military movements are too extensive for review here.
The most thrilling phase of the campaign began when Custer and his seventh cavalry set off up rose bud valley to follow a recent Indian trail.
The result of this subsidiary proceeding was the supreme tragedy in the annals of our American Frontier Warfare.
And of course, that was the battle at a little big horn.
Now, like I said, like it just stated, you had these groups and they're out in the plains.
And they're, I guess, tracking each other, or at least the soldiers, the US soldiers, the cavalry,
or tracking the Indians. And here we go, back to the book, and this is back to the voice of our man, Woodenleg.
We found the soldiers about seven or eight o'clock in the morning, I believe.
We had slept only a little, our horses were very tired, so we did not hurry our attack.
But always in such cases there are eager or foolish ones who begin to soon.
Not long after we arrived, there was fighting on the hillsides and on the little valley with the soldier camp.
In this early fighting, one of the young Cheyenne Fouwisly charged two foreign some Indians belonging to the soldiers got after him.
So, I'm going to read that again.
In this early fighting, one young Cheyenne Fouwisly charged two for and some Indians belonging to the soldiers got after him.
So, you have this whole war, there's Indians or Native Americans that are on both sides.
There's Native Americans that are working with the US cavalry and the soldiers, and then they're fighting against other Native American tribes.
So, back to the book, they shot and crippled his horse.
I and some other Cheyenne's drove back the pursuers. I took the young man behind me on my horse and we heard a way to the main body of our warriors.
Jack Red Cloud, the son of the old Ogala Chief Red Cloud, was wearing a war bonnet.
His horse was killed. According to the Indian way, in such case, the warrior was supposed to stop and take off the bridal from his killed horse to show how cool he could conduct himself.
But young Red Cloud forgot to do this. He went running as soon as his horse fell.
Three crows on horse back followed him, lashed him with their ponywifts and jerked off and kept his war bonnet.
They did not try to kill him. They only teased him, telling him he was a boy and not to be wearing a war bonnet.
Some of his two friends interfered in the crows went away.
The suit told us that young Red Cloud was crying and asking for mercy from the crows. He was my same age 18 years old.
White Wolf, a Cheyenne almost 30 years old, had a repeating rifle.
And drawing his weapon from its scabbard at his left side, it was accidentally just discharged.
The bullet broke his left thigh bone. He finally recovered and is yet living. This was in 1930. He still limps on account of that accidental wound.
Those are two just little...
First of all, young Red Cloud who was wearing a war bonnet.
And he's supposed to show how cool he is if his horse could shot.
Take that bridal with you. He did not do that.
And then again, this is an accidental discharge.
Which it does happen occasionally.
It's really bad to have accidental discharge, obviously.
Especially when you shoot yourself in the leg horrible.
So they stay. They continue moving around and they start to move towards a little bit going this river.
And back to the book, six aprihobe, a rapoho men came to the Cheyenne camp while we were at this place.
They said they were afraid of soldiers as they had killed a white man on powder river.
And so now you start to get, and again, I'm kind of moving quickly right now.
But there's now multiple tribes are starting to come together in this location.
Multiple tribes.
Each back to the book, each tribe operated its own internal government.
The same as if it were entirely separated from the others.
The chiefs of the different tribes met together as equals.
There was only one who's considered as being above all others.
This was sitting bull. He was recognized as the one old man chief of all the camps combined.
Almost all of our northern Cheyenne tribe were with us on legal little big horde.
Only a few of our 40 big chiefs were absent.
And this is interesting because there's a lot of controversy about how many Indians were there.
And some people said there wasn't that many. He said, all of these are all the Cheyenne were there.
And there was more than just the Cheyenne. So there had to be a bunch of them.
A bunch of them there.
Now we get into some of these different tribes and chiefs that were there.
The principal chiefs of the various camps were for the, for the whoop-papa's was sitting bull.
The Ogalalas was crazy horse, which we all ever had a crazy horse.
The Minikonju was lame deer.
Another tribe called Aerosolgon.
And they had an important chief called Humpnos.
There was the Black Feet, which wouldn't leg didn't know who is their chief.
And then you had the Cheyenne.
So there's a bunch of massive number of Native American warriors.
Talking about their armament back to the book, guns were not plentiful among us.
Most of our hunting had been with bows and arrows of the Cheyenne's two moons and white wolf each had a repeating rifle.
Some others had single shot, breech loading rifles, but there was not much ammunition for the good guns.
So they're mostly using bows and arrows, that's kind of what they have.
And at one point they kind of take their horses and they put them out to graze.
And they think that they had a little scrap with the soldiers and they kind of wasn't bad,
but they just sort of beat them and it seemed like the soldiers retreated.
And so they put their soldiers out.
I mean, they put their horses out to pasture and it seems like things are going pretty mellow.
And I go back to the book, I had no thought then of any fighting to be done in the near future.
We had driven away the soldiers on the Upper Rosebed seven days ago.
It seemed likely they would be gone a long time before they would trouble us again.
My mind was occupied mostly by such thoughts as regularly are uppermost in the minds of young men.
I was 18 years old and I like girls.
That night we had a dance.
It was an entirely social affair for young people, not ceremonial or war dance.
So there is they kind of gotten a scrap seven days ago.
They feel like they're pretty safe.
They put their horses out to pasture.
And then he starts thinking about the ladies.
And they basically party through the whole night.
Back to the book at the first sign of dawn, the dance ended.
And then him and his brother, they kind of take off and they go down by the river and fall asleep.
And that's the end of their night.
Back to the book.
In my sleep, I dream that a great crowd of people were making lots of noise.
Something in the noise startled me.
I found myself wide awake sitting up and listening.
My brother too awakened that we both jumped to our feet.
A great commotion was going on among the camps.
We heard shooting.
We heard across. We heard out from the trees. So we might see as well as here.
The shooting was somewhere at the upper part of the camp circles.
It looked as if all the Indians were there.
There were running away toward the hills to the westward or down toward our end of the village.
Women were screaming and men were letting out war cries.
Through it all, we could hear old men calling soldiers are here.
Young men go out and fight them.
So there they go. They thought they were peaceful.
But they're about to get it on.
And as he talked about before, what does he do to prepare for battle?
Here we go back to the book.
I jerked off my ordinary clothing.
I jerked on a pair of new breaches that had been given to me by another sue.
I had a good cloth shirt and I put it on.
My old moccasins were kicked off in a pair of beaten moccasins.
Substitute it for them.
My father strapped a blanket upon my horse and arranged my raw, high,
lariat into a bridal. He stood holding my mouth. Hurry here,
I was hurried but I was not ready.
I got my pants in my little mirror.
I, the blue black circles soon appeared around my face.
The red and yellow colorings were applied on all skin of the inside the circle.
I combed my hair.
It properly should have been oiled and braided neatly, but my father was again saying,
Hurry.
So I just looped to buck skin, thong about it,
and tied it up close to the back of my head to float loose from there.
My bullets, caps, and powder horn put me into full readiness.
In a moment afterward I was on my horse, going as fast as I could run,
to wear all the rest of the young men were going.
My brother had already gone.
He got his horse before I got mine,
and his dressing was only a buck string shirt,
fringe with crow Indian hair.
The hair had been taken from a crow at a past battle with them.
The air was so full of dust I could not see where to go,
but it was not needful that I see that far.
I kept my horse head in the direction of movement by the crowd of Indians on horseback.
I was led out and around and a far beyond the camp circle.
Many hundreds of Indians on horseback were dashing to and fro in front of the soldiers.
The soldiers were on level ground.
The soldiers were on the level valley ground,
and were shooting with rifles.
Not many bullets were being sent back at them,
but thousands of arrows were falling among them.
I went with a throng of Sue until we got beyond and behind the white men,
so you got a flank going on and they're starting to surround the white men.
By this time though, they had mounted their horses and were hiding themselves in the timber.
A band of Indians were there with the soldiers.
It appeared they were crow or show-shownies.
Most of the Indians had fled back up the valley,
somewhere across east of the river and were riding away over beyond the hills.
So there you go.
This is what happens.
He went, it's woken up and gets his war gear on and he's going into battle.
And interestingly, he talks about there's other Indians that they're fighting.
The crow's and show-shownies.
It sounds like most of them are bailing.
Back to the book,
our Indian crowded down toward the timber where...
one of the soldiers.
More and more of our people kept coming almost all of them were Sue.
There were only a few shians.
Arrows were shoured into the timber.
Bullets whistled out of the...
out toward the Sue and shians,
but we stayed far back while we extended our curved line further and further around the big grove trees.
So they're encircling them.
Some dead soldiers had been left among the grass and sage,
but brush where they had first fought us.
It seemed to me the remainder of them would not live many hours longer.
Sue were creeping forward to set fire to the timber.
They're going to set fire to the woods that they're hiding in.
Back to the book, suddenly,
the hidden soldiers came tearing out on horseback from the wood.
I was around on that side where they came out.
I wound my horse around and lasted into a dash to escape from them.
All others of my companions did the same,
but we soon discovered that they were not following us.
They were running away from us.
They were going as fast as their tired horses could carry them across the open valley space and toward the river.
We stopped, looked a moment,
and then we whipped our ponies into swift pursuit.
A great thong of...
...from of Sue were also coming after them.
My distant position put me among the leaders in the chase.
The soldiers' horses moved slowly as if they were tired.
Rars were very lively.
We gained rapidly on them.
I fired four shots with my six-shooter.
I do not know whether any of my bullets did harm.
I saw Sue put an arrow into the back of a soldier's head.
Another arrow went down into his shoulder.
He tumbled from his horse to the ground.
Others fell dead either from arrows or stabbing or jabbing from...
...or blows from...
...war clubs of the Sue.
Horses limp or stat limped or staggered or sprawled out dead or dying.
Our war cries and war songs were mingled with the many jering calls such as,
"...you're only boys, you ought not to be fighting.
We whipped you and rose, but you should have brought more crows or shoshones with you to do your fighting."
Little bird and I were after one certain soldier.
Little bird was wearing a trailing war bonnet.
He was at the right and I was at the left of the fleeing man.
We were lashing him and his horse with our pony whips.
It seemed not brave to shoot him.
Besides, I did not want to waste any of my bullets.
He pointed back to his revolver.
He pointed back his revolver, though, and sent a bullet into little bird's thigh.
Immediately, I whack the white man fighter on his head with a heavy, l-corn handle of my pony whip.
The blow dazed him.
I seized the rifle strapped on his back.
I wrenched it to the ground.
I grinched it and dragged the looping strap over his head.
As I was getting possession of this weapon he felt to the ground.
I did not harm him further.
I do not know what became of him.
The jam of oncoming Indians swept me on.
But I now had a good soldier rifle.
Yet I had not any cartridges for it.
Three soldiers on horses got separated from the others and started up the valley in the direction
from where they had come.
Three shions, sunbear eagle, tail feather, and little sun joined some suit and pursued in
the three white men.
The shions told afterward about the outcome of this pursuit.
One of the soldiers turned his horse eastward toward the river and escaped into the timber.
The other two kept on southward.
Of these two, one went off to the right up a small gulch to the top of the bench.
There he was caught and killed.
The remaining one rode on toward the mouth of Reno Creek.
As he neared that point he swore of to the right.
He made a circle upon the valley and returned to the timber just across west from the mouth of Reno Creek.
Here he dismounted from his exhausted horse and got himself into the bush.
The Sue and Shion surrounded him and killed him.
They told that he fought bravely to his last, making use of his six-shooter.
A warbana Indian belonging with soldiers was chased by crooked nose.
The Shion and some other Sue.
The chase was a foot across a wet slew and into some timber northward from where the soldiers had been hidden a few minutes.
After many exchanges of shots, after much dodging and shifting of position, the enemy Indian was killed there.
Just a crazy fight.
I mean, this is like stuff that you see in western movies.
People pulling each other off a horse is shooting people in the head with bow and arrow from a horse.
That's just crazy and brutal.
And I'll tell you there's some really good accounts.
And I started to go down this road.
So if anybody that's listening is a student of the battle of Little Big Horn, there's, you know, lots of different stories about it.
And there's also some really detailed accounts.
And I started trying to pull out and match up what was happening in this account with other accounts really historically accurate documented accounts.
And as I started to do that, I said, no, I'm not going to go down this road of trying to figure out exactly which situation he's talking about.
There was multiple small battles out there.
And there was like I said, Reno and Ben, Ben teen who survived with their soldiers and they made maneuvers and a lot of people blame them.
Some people don't blame them.
You know, some people say that they should have gone to help.
Some people say that they didn't have a chance.
There's all kinds of those things.
And as I started to try and figure out which was which I said, you know what, I'm not going to go that deep into this account.
What's important about this account to me is the reality of the ground combat.
That's what that's what I'm interested in in this account.
And I'm sure maybe at some point in my life when I have more time, I would love to marry up the two and say,
He must have been in this situation and this must have been this person and this must have been this maneuver.
He must have seen this maneuver from the from the cavalry.
It'd be fun to do that, especially go out and walk the ground and do it.
That would be really good.
But anyways, if you're a person that's fully into this, I'm not going down that road right now.
But I will go back to the book right now.
Another enemy Indian was behind a little sage brush, no, and shooting as at us.
His shots were returned.
I and some others went around and got behind him.
See this, I'll tell you what, wouldn't legs all about flanking people.
You notice that? He's just flanking people all over the place.
I and some others went around and got behind him.
We dismounted him.
We dismounted and crept toward him.
As we came close upon up to him, he fell, a bull in it hit him.
He raised himself up, though, and swung his rifle around toward us.
We rushed upon him.
I crashed a blow of my rifle barrel upon his head.
Others beat and stabbed him to death.
I also got his gun.
It was the same as the one I had taken from the other soldier, but the Indians gun had a longer barrel.
One of the Sue scout the dead man.
Different ones took his clothing.
I took nothing except the gun.
Continuing on, somebody said to me, look, yonder, other soldiers.
I saw them on a distant hill down the river and on our same side of it.
The news of them spread quickly among us Indians began to ride in that direction.
They're now going to again, this is where I didn't want to try and figure out exactly what
battle, but yeah.
There's another portion of the battle taking place.
I know in my head where he's going, but we'll just say there's he sees other soldiers to go after.
I'm pretty sure this is him going after custer.
As he's going towards this other battle with taking place, he passes through the camp again.
Then he sees his dad and he says, my father was the only person at our lodge.
I told him of the fight up in the valley.
I told him of having helped in the killing of the enemy Indian and some soldiers in the river.
I gave to him the tobacco I had taken.
I showed him my gun and all the cartridges.
You have been brave, he chured me.
You've done enough for the day.
Now you should rest.
No.
I want to go and fight the other soldiers.
I can fight better now with this gun.
Your horse is tired, he argued.
Yes, but I want to ride the other one.
So wouldn't leg.
He had a good morning so far.
God after it.
But he sees a fight going on and because he's a warrior, he says, no, I'm getting back in the game.
Back to the book.
As we approach the place of battle, each one chose his own personal course.
All the Indians had come out on horseback, almost all of them dismounted and crept along the gullies of
foot after the arrival near the soldiers.
I think that's the reason I highlighted that is because you got people doing decentralized
command.
Oh, you see where the battle is?
Get there.
Right?
We don't have to line up.
We don't have to march together.
You see where the battle is?
Get there on your own personal course.
Make it happen.
Most of the Indians were working around the ridge now occupied by the soldiers.
We're laying down in gullies and behind sage, brush hill locks.
The shooting at first was at a distance, but we kept creeping in closer all around the
ridge.
Boes and arrows were used more than guns.
From the hiding places of the Indians, the arrows could be shot high and long curve to
fall upon the soldiers or their horses.
And Indian using a gun had to jump on up and expose himself, long to shoot.
The arrows falling upon the horses stuck in their backs and caused them to go plunging here
and there knocking down the soldier.
This is classic.
You think that the rifle is the better weapon, but the rifle you have to expose yourself
to shoot.
Well, the Indians are just honkered down behind a knoll or behind some brush or behind a valley
and they're just lobbying like a mortar rounds.
Thousands of mortar rounds just hitting into where the soldiers are and the soldiers can't
do anything to them.
The long distance fighting was kept up for about an hour and a half, I believe.
The Indians all the time could see where the soldiers were because the white men were mostly
on a ridge and their horses were with them, but the soldiers could not see our warriors.
As they had left their ponies and were crawling through the gullies in the sagebrush,
warrior were jump up, shoot, jerk himself down quickly and then crawl a little forward.
A little further forward.
All around the soldier ridge are men were doing this, so not many of them got hit by soldier
bullets during this time of fighting.
This is beautiful.
This is exactly what we teach, what the military teaches.
Individual movement.
You shoot, you get up, you get back down, you crawl, you get up again.
So the enemy might see you.
Right, when you take a shot, then you duck and then when you pop up again, you're not
in the same place.
So if you were aiming where they were, they're not there anymore.
This is this is beautiful tactics.
In a few minutes, the warriors were all around these soldiers.
Then lame man, lame white man, this is an Indian.
Lame white man called out, come.
We can kill all of them all around the Indians, begin jumping up, running forward, dodging
down, jumping up again, down again, all the time towards the soldiers.
Right away, all the white men went crazy.
Instead of fighting us, they turned their guns upon themselves.
Almost before we could get to them, every one of them was dead.
They killed themselves.
The Indians took the guns of these soldiers and used them for shooting at the soldiers
on the high ridge.
I went back and got my horse and rode around beyond the east end of the ridge.
By the time I got there, all the soldiers were dead.
The Indians told me they'd killed only a few of those men and that the men had shot
each other and shot themselves.
And this is very controversial, whether these guys killed themselves.
And I don't even know if it's that controversial.
It's like straight up, most people don't believe that.
I don't know.
I don't know what the answer is.
But we know that one thing we do know, they're all dead.
Back to the book.
I saw one sue walking, and I'm sure you know what?
I'm sure that somebody that's listening to this is going to give us the full report.
Yeah.
And actually, I have books.
I have books and this is not this is not the same account, right?
This is different than killing themselves.
So I know that, but well, I'm talking about this book right now.
So I'm going with it.
I saw one sue walking slowly toward the gulch going away from where were the soldiers.
He wobbled easily as he moved along.
He fell down, got up, fell down, got up again.
As he passed near to where I was, I saw that his whole lower jaw was shot away.
The sight of him made me sick. I had to vomit.
I did not know him, and I did not learn whether he died or not.
The shots quit coming from the soldiers.
Warriors who had crepts, close to them, began to call out that all the white men were dead.
All the Indians then jumped up and rushed forward, all the boys and the old men on
their horses came tearing into the crowd.
The air was full of smoke and dust.
Nobody was greatly excited.
It looked like thousands of dogs might look if they were mixed together in a fight.
All of the Indians were saying that these soldiers went so crazy they killed themselves.
I do not know.
I could not see them, but I believe they did so.
Again, so he doesn't even know what the real deal is there.
But like I said, what we do know is that not one of them lived.
I took one scalp.
As I went walking and leading my horse among the dead, I observed one face that interested
me.
The dead man had a long beard growing from both sides of his face and extending several
inches below the chin.
He also had a full mustache.
All of the beard hair was of a light yellow color, as I now recall it.
Most of the soldiers had beard growing in different lengths, but this was the longest one
I saw among them.
I think the dead man may have been 30 or more years old.
Here is a new kind of scalp.
I said to a companion, I skinned one side of the face and half of the chin so I was to keep
the long beard yet on the part removed.
I got an arrow shaft and tied the strange scalp to the end of it.
This I carried in hand, as I went looking further.
Somebody told me noisy walking was badly wounded.
That was another Indian named noisy walking.
I went to where he was said to be down in the gulch where the band of soldiers near us
the river had been killed in the earlier part of the battle.
He was my same age and often we had been companions since our small boyhood.
White bull and important medicine man was his father.
Noisy walking had been hit by three different bullets.
One of them having passed through his body.
He also had some stab wounds in his side.
I asked the young man, how are you?
He replied, good.
But he did not look well.
One young shion took something from a dead soldier just after all of them had been killed.
He was puzzled by it.
Some others looked at it.
I was with them.
It was made of white metal and had glass on one side.
On this side were marks of some kind.
While the shion was looking at it, he got it up towards his ear.
Then he put it up close.
It's alive, he said.
Others put it to their ears and listened.
I put it to mind.
Tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick.
It was saying.
We talked about it's use.
We generally agreed that it was a soldier's special medicine.
Many Indians came and wondered about it.
The young man decided to keep it for his own medicine.
They found a watch on one of the soldiers, a little wind up pocket watch.
To me, this was just a really good example of the cultural differences they had never
seen a watch before.
They were surprised and demon-understanding what it was or that it was not actually alive.
It was just a mechanical watch.
Back to the book, Noisy Walking died during the night after the great battle.
The shions had been killed.
The man opened belly was badly wounded and was expected to die.
He was about 30 years old but he had neither wife nor children.
The six dead were lame white man, limber bones, black bear, noisy barking, hump nose,
when whirlwind.
Then after that battle, during the afternoon it was learned that yet another band of white
men were coming up, the little big horn valley.
All the young men wanted to fight.
A council of chiefs was held.
They decided we should continue in our same course and not fight any soldiers if we could
get away without doing so.
All of the Indians then got ready to move.
Probably a smart move.
So then after that they go to this area, that's called greasy grass.
And there they have a little war dance, a little sort of a, I guess you'd call it a ceremony
or a celebration.
Back to the book, charcoal bear, our medicine chief brought the buffalo skin from the
sacred T.P. and put it on top of a pole of the center of our camp circle.
We danced around this pole, no women took part in the dancing.
Many of them had sore legs from morning cuts and when they lose their husband, they would
cut themselves.
Our dance was not carried very far into the night.
It was mostly a short telling of experiencing, accounting of coup.
My father told, in a few words, what his two sons had done.
When he ended the telling of my warrior Axe said, the name of this son of mine is wooden
leg.
To this time, people had still used my boyhood name, eats from his hand.
But now this old name was entirely gone.
So after that battle a bit, little big horn is when wooden leg became wooden leg.
Now they proceed and together all this big mass of tribes.
About to separate their tribes and start going in their own directions and then they
get a report.
Soldiers are coming.
The two bands of Indians began to come together again.
The warriors mingled themselves as being one tribe.
The women and children and older men, both of both sets of people, moved together up the
tongue river.
The young men put themselves behind their fleeing people.
Somebody said to me, they have captured some women.
Your sister is one of them.
My heart jumped when this news came to me.
I lashed my horse into a run toward where it was said they had been captured.
There I saw the tracks of soldier horses.
The trail led me to the river of ice.
On the opposite side of the river, the west side were soldiers.
They began shooting at me.
I had to get away. I did not see any of the women so I suppose they had been killed.
My heart then became bitter toward these white men.
I hid my horse in the brush at the foot of the ridge where some warriors were on its top.
I walked up there.
Many Indians were hidden behind rocks and were shooting towards the soldiers.
I chose for myself a place of hiding and did the same.
I had my soldier rifle and plenty of cartridges.
Many soldiers were coming across the ice to fight us but we had the advantage because
our position was high and on a rocky ridge.
It's interesting that he doesn't even become bitter towards the soldiers until they do something
to his sister and then all of a sudden he's bitter towards the white men.
It's also important there at the end.
You got to get the high ground.
That's literally the only reason that I put that in there.
It's for a tie for those of you out there that are in the military that are fighting.
Get the high ground.
It gives you a massive advantage over the enemy.
So after this they kind of settle up the tongue river and there I'll go back to book
we found plenty of buffalo there.
We went on west to the upper little big horn.
After camping and hunting there we went farther to the big horn at the mouth of rotten
grass creek.
We did not stay there long.
We returned a little big horn.
Most of the last part of winter was spent in a camp in this valley.
All the time during the next few months we had good hunting.
Soldiers did not trouble us.
Nor did we trouble them.
All the people had good lodges.
In every way we were living yet according to our customary habits.
We were not bothering any white people.
We did not want to see any of them.
We felt we were on our land.
We had killed only such people as had come for driving us away from it.
So our hearts were clean from any feeling of guilt.
So they're kind of living.
They're kind of going back to just living their own, the way that they were used to living.
This is where this next chapter, chapter 7 is called the surrender of the shiands.
Just before the grass began to show itself in the early part of spring, two visitors
arrived at our camp on Little Big Horn.
One of these was our old captured old woman, sweet woman.
The other was a half-breed suit we called white.
Each had a horse to ride and each was leading a pack horse in their packs were tobacco
and other things for gifts to the principal chiefs.
The visitors said they've been sent out from the soldier fort at the mouth of the tongue
river to invite us to come there and surrender peaceably.
They brought us a promise from Bearcoat, the soldier chief there, that we should not be
harmed and should be given plenty of food.
So we're starting to get enticed.
We're starting to get enticed by some, you know, basically food tobacco.
The book, the four chiefs came back to us at this powder river camp.
White bowl was not with them.
They told us he had stayed with the soldiers to scout for them in hunting Indians.
This news did not please us.
As we looked at it, the surrendering to the soldiers was good if one felt like doing this,
but it offered to help them to kill friends, showed a bad heart.
I was more affected though by other news, the chiefs brought.
It was concerning my sister, Crooked Knows, one of the captives.
The chiefs were only a part of the first day out and coming back from the fort.
Somebody followed them to tell them about her.
She had been very sad and the heart because of a belief she would never see her people.
She had felt better when the chiefs came, but when they went away again, she fell into
a deep grief.
My sorrow was so great.
Her sorrow was so great that she had gotten out her hidden sick shooter.
I had given to her and she sought herself dead.
My heart almost stopped beating when I heard about her death this way.
She had been a good sister kind to everybody.
Seven shions from the agency came to the camp on powder river.
One of them had a T.P.
Lodge, but no women were with them.
They came only to tell us we ought to surrender at the agency.
They said all the Indians there were being well fed, well treated in every way.
Nobody was being punished in any manner for past conduct and warfare against the soldiers.
So they're getting told basically.
There's another group.
There's the concern right at the fort.
The army fort or the concern at the Indian agency, which is also controlled by the soldiers.
And of course, I just read that part about what in leg sister committing suicide.
So just a devastating blow to him.
Now as this continues, the decision gets made by the chiefs to surrender.
Actually at first to find out a little bit more gather some more until.
Sorry, little wolf and the other principal chiefs chose to go out to the agency.
And then when they come back, they say that it's pretty good to go.
And when they hear this, they hear about the food, they hear about the whiskey, they hear
about the shelter, they decide that the main body of the tribe sets off towards the agency
to surrender.
Back to the book, but not all the shions were ready yet to surrender at any place.
14 or 15 men, six or seven of them having wives or children separated off to go westward.
White hawk, a little chief of the elk warriors, was with them.
I joined another band still desiring the most freedom we considered to be ours by right.
34 shions made up this band.
So there's a couple of separate groups that break off and decide they're going to continue
pushing.
And as they're doing that when they get in these smaller groups, if you can imagine, I mean,
just like any group, if you break it down enough, you start to lose your efficiency.
And that's what happened with these smaller groups.
They just weren't as efficient anymore because they had less people.
I mean, you can't catch as many.
You can't work in cooperation to hunt buffalo.
And so they didn't do well on their own.
Back to the book, we were having a good many days of hunger.
Our horses had plenty of grass, but our own ribs were becoming thin.
Our clothing was wearing out and we could knock it enough skins to renew them and keep our
beds and our lodges in good order.
My soldier coat and breaches were gone.
And my last shirt and cough breaches were almost in tatters.
The only good article of where I had now was my big white hat.
I had captured at the Rosebud Battle.
The Cheyenne named Yellow Eagle added himself to us.
He had been at the agency not before, not long before.
We decided to have him and white bird go there and spy out the conditions.
They went in a week or so.
They were back among us.
Good treatment, plenty of food, blankets, everything.
Nobody punished.
They reported.
They started right away for the agency.
So when they split apart into these smaller groups, that was definitely problematic.
And now they go from being out there, kind of on their own, hungry, running out of food.
Don't have to quit many more.
And they send somebody to the agency to check it out and they get the report back.
But there's plenty of food and blankets in the warm.
And all they're going to do there is go ahead and give up.
So now they move and they start heading towards the agency.
And when they get there, back the book, it made us all feel good to see hundreds of the
Indian lodges as we came near to the agency.
We galloped.
Our horses forward.
We cheered and fired gunshots into the air.
Some soldiers came running out of their tents.
But they soon saw we were friendly and only celebrating and notifying our people we had come.
So here they are.
And a white man, Mary 2 Cheyenne woman, was acting as an interpreter for the soldiers.
His name was Roland.
But white hat did not need any interpreter in talking to us.
He could make the sign talk so well.
After the general handshaking, white hat said, now you men must give me your guns and
your horses.
We were not expecting this, but we trusted him so we began to do as he asked.
I'm telling you got to be careful in the situation.
When you start giving up your guns, this is not a recommended course of action.
You know, if you're coming in peace, why are you not allowed to keep your weapons?
This is not a, I did not agree with this scenario.
Back to the book.
We had one big chief standing elk who kept saying it would be better if we should go there.
So they're trying to get them to push towards the south.
Like towards Oklahoma would be Oklahoma and they're kind of against it.
They don't want to walk anymore and they feel like they hey look, we came here.
We were supposed to be here.
They're saying oh no, we're going to move you guys south.
And they're all saying no, we don't want to.
So that's what standing elk is talked about.
So standing elk who kept saying it would be better if we should go there.
I think there were not as many as 10 shians and a whole tribe who agreed with him.
There was a feeling that he was talking this way only to make himself a big Indian among
the white people.
The white men chiefs would not talk much to any shian chief, but him.
They gave him extra presence and treated him as if he were the only tribe, the only chief
in the tribe, but he was, but one of our 40 tribal big chiefs.
One day he went about telling everybody, all right, get ready to move.
The soldiers are going to take us from here tomorrow.
Lots of shianans were angry.
We'd understood that when we surrendered, we would live on our same white river reservation.
We'd given up our guns and our horses and a quit fighting because of this promise.
Now, after we had put ourselves at this great disadvantage, the promise was to be broken.
But we could not do anything except they'll bathe him.
So three sleeps after my small band had come to what we thought was to be our home.
The whole tribe was on its way to what we now call Oklahoma.
So again, that's why we don't give up our guns.
You give up your guns, you give up your strength, you give up your leverage, give up your
ability to fight.
The soldier leader of our movement to the south was known as tall white man.
He was a good man, always kind to the Indians.
We had to do whatever he said we must do, but he talked good to our chiefs.
So all of us were pleased to have him guiding us.
He had with him a band of soldiers.
I do not know how many, but I think there may have been almost 100 of them.
Our horses that have been taken away from us at the agency were returned to us.
Still many shions did not own any.
Old people who had no animal to ride were provided with them from the soldier heard.
Or very older sick people were allowed to ride in the soldier wagons.
Young men who owned no horses had to walk or borrow from friends.
I owned four.
I had three of them, blown out, most of the time.
So that's actually the treatment at this point by tall white man was fairly good.
It sounds like they kind of got along with the soldiers at this point.
Here's an example of that.
Soldiers hunted with the Indians.
All the soldiers were friendly and good to us.
They were good shooters and they killed lots of game.
They gave us most of the meat.
I became specifically friendly with two or three of them.
I like to be with them and they appeared to like me.
I went at times to their camp and the evening and visited with them.
When we were about halfway along and our journey asked one of them, let me take your gun tomorrow.
Yes, you may take it until late.
So I think the reason I wanted to bring that up is when you get soldiers and warriors and
you put them together and you get rid of the politics.
Guess what?
They get along.
We like shooting.
We like hunting.
We're warriors.
We're going to get along.
Kind of like the Germans playing the playing soccer.
And soccer, exactly.
Maybe a glass of scotch and collet.
Now when they get down to Oklahoma, they settle in in the south.
Here we go back to the book.
I learned in the south of Whiteman, name of long hair.
The soldier, big chief, we killed on the little big horn.
I was told he was called general custer.
I had heard his name spoken at the White River Agency, but I do not understand clearly
who was meant by it.
The southern shians knew of him because of his having fought against them before he had come
into our northern country.
They had surrendered to him.
After we've been a year on this reservation, many of our people began to be asked to be
taken back to the north.
There was no game here.
And we were not allowed to go off the reservation for hunting and we were not given food
as it had been promised.
We should be given.
At time some of our young men would violate the orders and would slip away from the
reservation to get a buffalo or some other animal good to eat.
Some white people said the Indians were killing their cattle.
I do not know I did not do this.
I stayed alt the time on the reservation, but if any Indians did kill the whiteman cattle,
they did so because they were very hungry you could not find any wild game.
We ate the beef because it was the best we could get.
We always liked much better the wild game.
There was much sickness among the northern shians.
To us it was a new kind of sickness, chills and fever and aching of the bones dragged
down most of us to thin and weak bodies.
Our people died, died, and kept following each another, following one another out of this
world.
Finally little wolf declared that he for one was moving back north.
Whether the white people, consented or not.
Others said they would follow him.
The agent told them that the soldiers were going to train and would kill them.
They were promised more food.
They waited for it, but it did not come.
More people flocked to little wolf side.
Don't knife said he would go to.
Late in the summer more than half the tribe started out.
Little wolf's last message to the agent was, the soldiers make kill all of us, but they
cannot make a stay in this country.
The soldiers went after them.
Other soldiers from other places were sent out to head them off.
The shians were hunted from all directions.
They were found many times, but each time the shians fought off their pursuers and kept
moving northward.
Many of our people were killed, but most of them got back to their old home country and
were allowed to stay there.
From the southern shians, I learned a great deal about general clusters dealing with
them in that country.
All of them said he had smoked the peace pipe with them at that time that they had surrendered
to him seven years before he was killed.
According to the custom among us, this was understood as a promise by him that never again
would he fight against the shians.
When they learned that he had been killed by our people in the Sioux, they considered
him as having deserve that kind of death on account of his failure to keep his peace
oath.
I got a wife from the southern shians.
She had been a girl at the Shian camp at the Washits river when Custer and his soldiers came
there and killed many shians and burned their lodges in November of 1968.
Chief Blackpot was one of the ones killed.
The women and children fled same as ours had done at powder river.
It was winter and there was many and there was at that time a deep snow for that country.
Soldiers chased the women and children and killed many of them as well as the men.
My wife at that time a girl was barefooted as others were also.
They had been surprised in the early morning.
She stopped and cut off pieces of buffalo robe to tie about a feet to keep them warm as
she ran.
When they got to the camp, it's of snake Indians, further down the river.
My wife told me she was also with the shians when they surrendered to General Custer in
1869.
She had smoked the pipe with their chiefs when they surrendered.
Some of the chiefs were put in a prison and had chains upon their ankles.
When I heard all of this from my wife as well as from many of the other southern shians,
it seemed the great medicine may have directed Custer to his death as punishment for having
broken his promise to the shians.
So eventually they do go back north and they re-establish reservations up in the north and
eventually wouldn't leg proceeds up there as well.
When he gets up there, he seems like things are in a pretty bad way.
Back to the book.
The most sorrowful new condition we found in coming back to our shian country was in the
case of little wolf himself.
Some white men about the fort were selling or giving whiskey to the Indians.
One night, little wolf got a bottle of whiskey and right away he drank all of it.
He went into the fort, traders store and leaned forward upon the counter.
He was quiet but he was dizzy and stumbling here and there.
The trader said little wolf, you'd better go to your lodge but he said no, I want to stay
here.
Some shian men and women were playing cards at a table in the store, famished elk, a young man's
sergeant of the scouts was with them.
He talked a little wolf but the old chief paid no attention to his talk.
Famished wolf took hold of little wolf's arm and said, come I will help you to get you to
your lodge.
He spoke and acted respectfully but little wolf was angered because of the taking hold of
him.
He pulled himself away, his eyes blazed like fire.
He stood a moment looking at the young man, then he said, I will kill you.
He staggered alone on out from the store, famished elk returned to sit in the card game,
nobody was expecting any further trouble.
But not long afterward the door was opened and a little wolf stumbled into the room.
He straightened himself out, levelled or rifle and fired.
Famished elk sank down dead upon the floor.
The old chief went back to his lodge and told his two wives what he had done.
We must go, he added.
The three of them went out into the darkness of the night, soldiers and shian searched
for them.
They searched during the next day and the next.
The missing man and his two wives appeared in myel city and sat themselves down in a place
and playing view of the people there.
A captain and some soldiers went to him.
The captain we knew as little chief.
He told little wolf what it was he had done.
He said, he further told him, you are no more a chief of the shian's.
That is true and just little wolf willful greed.
He was not punished in any other way, but he further punished himself.
Or he and his wives had left their lodge, he smashed into pieces his medicine pipe.
Our old tribal laws required this.
It was not allowable for him afterward to smoke.
It was allowable for him afterward to smoke all alone and any small and short stemmed pipes
such as might be made from a deer leg bone, but he did not do this.
He denied himself all smoking.
He never made any offer even to sit in the company of other shian smoking together.
The equipment offered him sometimes cigarettes, but he always refused them.
After time he learned to chew tobacco a habit never followed by the old-time shian's.
It seemed he did this deliberately for self-humiliation.
He never tried to intrude himself on any trouble tribal public affairs.
The people remembered his great services in past times, but nobody consulted him on tribal
matters in present times.
Literally in every way he was never more a chief among the shian's.
So alcohol, not good, not good for your decision-making processes.
Back to the book.
When I was 31 years old in 1889, I enlisted with other shian's to form a new band of
scouts for the soldiers at 4K.
For a long time we did not do much except drill and work at getting out logs from the
timber and building houses for ourselves.
So he joins the army.
He joins the army becomes a scout.
We shian scouts had not get into any battle.
At one time we were all dressed and ready, but the officers made a stop behind the hill
while the soldiers went on and killed many sew in a camp on a little valley just over the
hill.
A sew started that fight by killing an officer who was taking all the guns from them.
The soldiers began to shoot and many women and children were killed as well.
This trouble was on wounded knee creek.
At the time of our advance up the hill, I was wearing a war bonnet for the first time
in any battle.
He was talking about they were present at the massacre at wounded knee, which was a horrible
massacre committed you can hear.
It was between 150 and 300 sew were killed by soldiers and it included probably about
half of them were women and children.
And later he's talking about some dreams it has.
Back to the book I believe I slept, but I'm not sure whether I was sleeping and dreaming
or I was only lying there and thinking.
I kept my cartridge belt buckled on me and I hugged my rifle to my body.
It seemed that angry sue Indians were all about me.
They were searching for me to kill me.
Some of them were striking at me with war clubs and slashing at me with knives.
I heard them calling my name wouldn't leg.
I jumped up and stood there wide awake.
So he's having nightmares.
He's a massacre happens and he feels like obviously subconsciously he's got some
nightmares about that.
Now back to the story of Little Wolf, the chief that shot the other Indian at the card game.
Back to the book one day I saw the old man Little Wolf at the camp.
This is a year's later.
I said to my wife I see Little Wolf.
He's my relative.
One of his wives is a sister of my father.
I think I ought to invite him to eat in our lodge.
I'm glad to hear you say that chance or tell him to come now.
Right away, he should begin to prepare bread and meat and coffee.
When I brought Little Wolf around, I found he was partly drunk.
He fumbled the food and he sat and ate.
He ate freely as though he were very hungry.
He kept quiet and kept looking downward during all the time.
When he was done eating, I told him of my sympathy with him in his great trouble.
He then told me all about the affair.
I love the young man and all of his people.
I was crazy when I shot him.
At this time in the conversation, Little Wolf was about 70 years old.
This man gave away all of his horses after he had been put out of his position as our
greatest chief.
After that all of his traveling was done of foot.
Sometimes he went alone, sometimes a wanderer both of his wives accompanied him.
He took, along whatever packs they could carry and they slept in temporary shelters or
with no shelter.
He went at times to visit the crows.
He visited also the Arapahose, in Wyoming, walking 200 miles or more back and again.
He died in 1904 at the age of 83 years.
His wives and close friends stood his body upright on a high hill overlooking the Rose
Bud Valley where many shions had their reservation homes.
A great heap of stones was built to enclose him thus standing upright.
Twenty-four years later his bones were brought to the agency cemetery and put into a grave
there.
Bird, the old-time Indian story white man who lives in New York had a stone put at the
head of this agency grave.
Even in the nearest of relatives of even the nearest relatives of famished elk never
kept bad hearts against little wolf.
At different times I've heard talk of him from bald eagle, a brother of the young man
killed.
Bald eagle said little wolf did not kill my brother.
It was the white man whiskey that did it.
Now we fast forward.
Thirty years after the great battle against the custer there was a gathering of Indians
and white people at little big horn.
The shions and some other Indians went with a few soldiers to Fort Custer, not far from
the place where the great battle had been.
The soldiers at the Fort Shokans with all of us, we gathered together in some friendly
speeches were made by the officers and Indians.
All I said was, a long time ago we were enemies.
Today we are friends.
And going even further into the adult 50 years old now.
Wooden Leg says, I was baptized by the priest at Tong River Mission when I was almost
50 years old.
My wife and our two daughters were baptized too.
I think the white people prayed to the same great medicine we do in our old shion way.
I did not go to church often, but I do go sometimes.
I think the white church people are good, but do not believe all the stories they tell
about what happened the long time ago.
The way they tell us, all the good people in the old times were white people.
I'm glad to have the white man churches among us, but I feel more satisfied when I make
my prayers in the way I was taught to make them.
My heart is much more contented when I sit alone with my medicine pipe and talk with
the great medicine about whatever may be troubling me.
We had good medicine men in the old times.
It may be that they did not know of as much about sickness as the white men doctors know,
but our doctors knew more about Indians and how to talk to them.
Our people then did not die young as they so much as they do now.
Now wouldn't leg have had a couple of daughters.
He talks about them here.
The younger daughter fell into an illness when she was about 14 years old.
We expected she would soon be herself again, but she grew worse instead of better.
She became so weak she could not stay at school any longer.
She continued to go downward after we brought her into our home.
Finally her spirit went back to the great medicine.
All of our love was now fixed upon the other daughter.
She advanced to full young womanhood.
She could read the white man books she could write letters to our friends far away, but
she too became ill, same as her younger sister.
During all of one winter she gradually wasted away.
Every afternoon her body burned with fever, every night her bed was soaked with sweating.
Every morning she coughed almost to strangling.
Neither the medicines of the agency physician nor the prayers of our own medicine men could
help her.
Just when the spring grass was coming up she was buried in our mission cemetery.
My heart fell down to the ground.
I decided then that the white man's school is not good for Indian children.
I think they do not get enough of meat at the boarding school.
I think that they are kept in school too much during the year.
They ought to be out and free to go as they please during all of the good weather of
the autumn and the spring.
In the book closes out in the last years of wooden legs life and he's all and he's respected
and he's living safely on a reservation.
He says it is comfortable to live in peace on the reservation.
It is pleasant to be situated where I can sleep soundly every night without fear that my
horses may be stolen or that myself or my friends may be crept upon and killed.
But I like to think about the old times when every man had to be brave.
I wish I could live again through some of the past days when it was first thought of
every prospering Indian.
The first thought of every prospering Indian was to send out the call.
A whole friend's come come.
I have plenty of buffalo meat.
I have coffee.
I have sugar.
I have tobacco.
Com friends.
Feast and smoke with me.
And I'll tell you that I miss those days too.
When every man had to be brave, when comfort was no guarantee, when life itself wasn't
a guarantee.
And I think that is one of the lessons to be taken from wooden leg is something you hear
me say often is that you have to cherish it.
Cherish the struggle, the contest, the suffering, the risk don't shy away from it.
Instead, cherish it.
And another piece that I find so important, so reinforcing to what I see in the world is
look at how the science were beaten.
It wasn't an war.
It wasn't in battle.
They weren't defeated by the white man's guns or the white man's tactics.
They were slowly taken apart.
Convinced to take an easier path.
And enticed by the comfort of the reservations.
Where food, shelter, tobacco and alcohol were all readily available.
They were defeated in some decisive battle by weapons or by war.
They were defeated and controlled by one tiny, seemingly insignificant surrender at a time.
Giving up their land and giving up their horses and giving up their guns.
They were tricked.
They were lied to.
And the word was not kept and the promises were not kept, but they gave up their ability
to fight back.
Then it's hard to guard against that.
It's hard to even see it happening because it's like trying to watch an hour hand move.
You don't see it.
You don't see it move.
Then you turn around and this beautiful and this magnificent warrior culture is relegated to
whiskey and dependency and entrapment for reservations.
And I think that's an important message.
I think that's an important message for our culture.
Because culture that we have now, the culture of creativity and of open mindedness and of
strength and of individual freedom.
That we need to stay vigilant.
We need to stand guard against small infractions that may seem meaningless and insignificant,
but that will chip away that who you are as a people and as a culture.
And the Native Americans, I mean we could go on and on about the bravery that those
warriors showed, even past this period in World War II, there's a story upon story about
the bravery that they showed in the Vietnam War, Native Americans that served with honor and courage.
We have to learn more than just that.
And I think it's the same thing on an individual level as well.
Because it's not that we as people, it's not that we as an individual as a person, it's
a wake up one day and you decide that's it.
I give up.
I'm going to be weak now.
I'm just going to just surrender everything to be comfortable.
We don't do that in one day.
It doesn't happen.
It's not one decision.
It's a slow incremental process that just chips away.
It's a way it will and chips away in our discipline.
We wake up a little bit later and we miss a workout and we miss another one and we
start to eat but we shouldn't eat and we start to drink what we shouldn't drink and without
even realizing it one day you wake up and you become something that you never would
have allowed.
And instead of being strong, you're weak.
And instead of being disciplined, you are disorganized and you are lost.
And instead of moving forward and progressing, you are moving backward and you are decaying.
And that happens without us even seeing it.
Without us recognizing it.
So you have to be vigilant.
You have to be on guard.
You have to hold the line even on the seemingly insignificant little things.
Things that shouldn't matter but those things do matter.
And instead of going backward instead of decaying, get stronger, get better, grow and
learn and develop and live.
And live in such a way that you don't remember the old days with sorrow that they are
gone but with pride.
And with gratitude that those old days led you to where you are today.
The place of wisdom and a place of knowledge and a place of experience and a place of peace.
And I certainly hope that wouldn't lag found his peace with the great medicine.
You don't have any, I don't know if I mean you are probably one of the few people that I know
anyway that probably didn't go through high school and think about history class
when am I ever going to use this?
A lot of us think thought that.
And like this kind of stuff, right?
Like actual stuff.
History, history, history, history class and it probably was.
You had to have learned about about a little big horn.
You had to have.
You may not remember it.
I don't remember from high school.
That was whatever.
40 something years ago.
One did knee rings a bell.
You know.
Yeah.
So that was probably that attitude.
For most of us.
Like what are we going to use this?
Why do I gotta know this 1776?
Why do I gotta know?
Why?
How is this going to help me in my job that I'm going to be a doctor?
Whatever, even if you had high aspirations.
So this, that last part, you just said, but that's why.
For real, what part?
What do you mean the whole part?
The whole part.
Yeah, at the end where you're like, okay, look, and here's what how it was explained to
me by my mom and dad.
History is important because you have all the people that you learned about, all the events
you learn about.
You learn lessons out of it.
Of course as a kid, you're like, all right, well, you know, I'm just memorizing dates
and events here.
But they're like, no, you learn lessons.
Like history, you know, wars, all that, this is all the like settle problems.
You gotta learn lessons from Mr. Mike.
All right, I get it.
This, I think, on an, like on a group level, you can learn a lot less than of course
from history and this on an individual level.
Everybody, especially now, bro.
Now it's like, I was thinking about this today.
Okay, I'm driving home.
I went to the pumpkin patch, right, and the pumpkin patch is, it's a, it's really cool.
It's a, it was down in Bonit, it was, it wasn't like a built one and a parking lot.
There you go, too.
It was like a legit one and hard leaning one there and my daughter's running around.
And, you know, my wife comes from the country and stuff.
So she's like, see, this kind of pumpkin patch is great compared to the ones that built
in the parking lots.
And I'm thinking, that's where we are today, where all, not a pumpkin patch.
Let's go build a pumpkin patch.
Like that's how, how little really we have to do.
We're building pumpkin patches.
So you can go experience a pumpkin patch on pavement.
Yes, on an parking lot.
In a parking lot.
Yeah, we're done with this, you know, built thing.
We get, you know, you have shows on TV.
I always harp on reality, but man, this is the reality.
PUN.
Of it.
Where we have time now, the time and the inclination to sit and watch hours of just
other people living there.
Yeah, that's the system.
That's the thing.
That's where we are today.
I'm not saying we all do it, but I'm saying we can't, we want.
Yeah, we can't if we want.
That's where we are.
So consider that.
That's the opposite of this.
That's like basically what you're talking about right there.
Yeah.
Where you're like, okay, the more like kind of, you didn't really say avoid luxury and
nothing like that.
But basically, you keep your capability and check.
You know, like, I don't want to miss the old days when I was capable.
Because I gave it up to be more comfortable.
That's the less than I think that you can learn individually.
Yeah, no doubt.
And I think even, you know, the culture.
We're talking about cultures, the cultures of warriors.
Yeah.
That, you know, they got overrun by the white man, right?
Overrun by the white man.
Now there was brutal battles and we're going to go, I mean, you could spend all day
talking about.
But we're talking, I'm just speaking about one aspect of this.
You had incredible warrior cultures that had lived this way for unknown amount of time,
thousands of years.
And in what, 50 years or something, 100 years, it was completely different for them.
And yeah, and what I'm saying is, you think that they got
a cluster destroyed or there was this battle.
Like, no, if you hear that story, it wasn't a fight to the death.
It was a slow, just crumbling away of their culture, the way they had it.
And from a perspective of, I mean, another lesson that can be taken away from this,
that's, you know, we talked about this all the time.
That was a, it's a form of negotiation, right?
Lesson, hey, don't worry about just come a little bit further.
You know, just move a little bit further down the path, move a little bit further down
the path.
And yeah, that's what, that's my point is be careful and pay attention to what you're
giving up from your, from your individual life and from your culture as a group, right?
In America, right?
I'm speaking now from my culture as an American.
That's our culture.
What are we going to give up?
Where is it going?
That's what we need to look out for because at some point we could look around.
And it's one thing if we don't have the culture anymore, we don't, we have a different
culture.
But the thing that I'm talking about, and it's okay for American culture to morph and
to grow.
That's okay.
But what I do, what we do have to watch out for is if we ever give up the strength
to defend ourselves and say, you know what?
Okay, you cross the line.
Yeah.
And we are not going to do what you're saying right now.
You know, that's what we need to be careful of.
We can never give up, you know, somebody asked me on Twitter the other day, you know,
in 140 characters, what should our foreign policy be?
And I did it in one word.
Our foreign policy should be strength.
Yeah.
Strength should be our foreign policy.
We should be strong.
And I'm telling you right now, and we've talked about this before, when you are strong
and you can defend yourself and you know that you can handle any problem that comes
your way, you're not going to have many problems.
Right?
It's not going to happen.
It's when you're weak.
It's when you let your guard down.
That's when you have problems.
Yeah.
And strength, essentially, capability, right?
That's what I'm not saying.
I'm not talking about the foreign policy thing at all.
You go down that path with me.
No, I mean.
Not now.
But, okay.
So, you know, like, crossfit, for example.
Right.
Oh, yeah, okay.
Well, by strength, I don't just mean strength.
Of course, I mean, that's what I mean.
Can't the ability to escape this.
Yes.
I stand corrected.
No, yeah.
No, I didn't mean to correct.
Of course.
I mean, like, I'm contributing.
Yeah.
I'm contributing.
But, you know how, okay.
So, I remember when crossfit exploded under the scene, people got real into it.
And sometimes people would get criticized.
And I said, man, you're doing this all this crazy work.
You're just getting good at working out.
Like, you're trying to get into this crazy shape for nothing.
Like, what are you training for?
You're not training for support.
You're just training.
I mean, I'm sure you could actually say, it could kind of be said about you.
You're waking up every day, training a hard life for what?
And you're like for life.
Yeah.
Right.
So, you're training for capability.
I'm capable.
Are you capable?
And what level of capability do you have?
So people who've spent like a, and this by no means is any kind of judgment.
But if you've spent your life neglecting your health or your capability, you know,
you can be less well off.
You're not going to be very well off.
So with that, there is that caution.
Like, this is the tail of a cautionary tail.
One of the many probably over here, straight where if you are capable.
If it doesn't seem like your environment is testing that capability, bro, watch out.
Yes.
Test the capability yourself.
Yeah.
Is it what you got to test the capability yourself?
That's good thing to end about spending too, because that whole system, this system.
But especially now, like I said, life is luxury right now for us.
Where you can, back in the day, you're hunting for food.
You're a starvation here.
It's like too much, for example.
I want to hear examples from before.
So it's like it's luxury.
So even like consumption, right?
What do you spend your money on?
You know?
Spend money on entertainment, seems not really in line with improving your capability.
You know, like that's what I remember when we moved.
I was like, I want to get a home gym.
And it was pretty expensive, like what I wanted.
But it was easily justifiable.
Yeah, absolutely.
Because and I wasn't thinking in these specific terms, but really basically that's what
I was thinking.
Like this is going to help me in life.
Who's going to be?
For sure.
It helped me be more capable.
Way more.
And I already had a gym membership.
But you want the home gym.
You want the home gym.
You can be even more capable overall.
I'm just saying.
So if, you know, like a lot of times that alone can justify like certain types of consumption.
For sure.
Yeah, if you're, yeah, absolutely.
I don't even think when it comes to me to spend making expenditure.
There's on things that are going to make me better.
Yeah.
There's not even, like, I don't hesitate on those things.
I hold a trigger.
Yeah.
I make it happen.
Play around.
Yeah.
Do not play around.
And I've been known to be pretty tight with my money.
Yeah.
But not when it comes to something that's going to make me better.
No, when it's so, yeah.
Yeah.
For sure.
Yeah, man.
Well, amazing book.
Amazing life.
I picked this book up on Amazon.com.
The book is called Wooden Leg, a Warrior who fought.
Custer.
Maybe later we'll do some more.
Maybe we'll do the other side of this battle.
And maybe get a little bit more into the battle.
Like I said, there's plenty of lessons learned from custer.
There's plenty of lessons learned there.
And there's a lot of controversy around it.
And that's why I tried to avoid the controversy.
I've tried to stick with just what's being said by Wooden Leg himself.
There's a lot of controversy about this battle and who did what and who is to blame and what mistakes were made.
And what I take from all those things, I'll learn from all of them.
I'll learn from every theory.
I'll learn from all of them.
That's my goal.
But we'll definitely get into that.
This book is just a great read.
The more you can fill your head up with different perspectives.
And the more you can pay attention to the Native American and learn more about their culture.
Awesome culture.
Warrior your culture.
Yes.
Love that.
And like I said, you know, served with honor in all of our wars here, you know, which is,
we should probably do a whole podcast about Native Americans fighting in World War 2 and Vietnam.
And in the current conflicts we have.
So you can pick that up on Amazon on the inner webs.
And if you want to help the podcast, you can actually do a little click through of Amazon.
Yeah, I was going to say, I'll put that book link on the website.
Click on it.
Take your right to the book.
And as far as Amazon goes in general, there's a click through on the website.
So it doesn't matter what you're going to buy correct.
From Amazon.
If you want to support the podcast, that's, you know, that's essentially what you want to invest three to five seconds.
Opening that page and clicking through.
Yeah, you want to support the podcast. That's a great way to know that it doesn't cost anything.
Yeah, getting in the game, making yourself awesome.
Everyone really more capable.
Yes.
Let's improve knowledge.
Yeah, all that stuff.
Yeah, click through Amazon boom.
Because the website click through and say the tier favorites.
It's a little trick, a little efficient trick support.
Actively.
Passive.
Yeah.
Real aggressive.
Aggressive.
Anyway, also speaking of making yourself capable.
Supplementation.
Man, I still haven't gotten.
Creole oil yet.
I'll make that order tonight.
But Creole oil.
There's no longer on me.
Yeah, it's on you now.
Yeah, yeah, we, you know, we took the steps.
Yeah, we're doing it.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, it's, well, it was always on me.
Let's face it.
It's fun to put it on your butt.
Nonetheless.
Creole oil is.
Would you say that's the main one?
Man, I've been.
I've been on Creole oil for a long time and I dig it.
Yeah, there it is.
Creole oil, warrior bars.
These are just ones I'm recommending.
Creole.
Just some text.
Get your text again.
Go to on it on it.
That comes lash.
That's for 10% off.
But if you didn't know what on it is, it's just the best supplement.
We'll just say that.
They have some other cool stuff on their two, but anyway,
that's the one.
Don't.
I think they have some new stuff coming out too.
We'll talk about that next time.
It's got to do a evaluation on that one.
But yeah, on it is don't.
And of course, subscribe to the podcast on iTunes.
If you haven't already.
Yeah, that's a good one.
And tell your friend.
Yeah, tell your friend.
And here's the tell all your friends.
Both of them.
Yeah.
To subscribe to the podcast.
Here's it.
It's, I mean, I guess it's kind of obvious for us to say,
Hey, tell your friends about our podcast.
You know, that makes sense.
But when you tell your friends about like, okay, so I'm a friend who has a friend.
Our friends, two of them.
They listen to his podcast.
Oh, it's going to be a good joke.
We need them for a long time.
They listen.
And then they tell their other friend.
I didn't know this, but I see on Facebook.
Thank you for telling me about Dr. Go podcast.
I had to, you know, all this stuff.
So these were people that know us, but didn't know about the podcast.
No, to be a well, no, no, to people knew us,
Newspotcast.
I'll be apparently had told some people he was,
Thank you.
I'm officially, here's the thing.
The more people who act like, I don't know,
take anything you talk about.
Extreme ownership will say anybody.
Good.
But just the concept of the extreme ownership.
Right.
You get somebody implementing extreme ownership by a factor of 10
percent in their life and they're in your life.
That's an improved life.
That is an improved life.
That's why you, I would say that's that reason alone is good
or even tell someone about the podcast.
Yeah, yeah.
I know, I mean, I hear from people that say the podcast has helped
them out greatly, which is the best,
it's why we're sitting here.
Right.
Because if all, if I didn't hear that from anybody,
if we got no feedback,
maybe we wouldn't be doing the podcast right now.
Maybe we wouldn't have to learn about one leg tonight.
Yep.
Yeah.
Okay.
So yeah, tell your friends about the podcast.
Yeah, get them in the game for sure.
And tell them about that YouTube channel.
The YouTube channel, right?
The YouTube channel.
YouTube channel is good.
I can put up videos almost on a daily right now.
Oh, wait, no, we don't.
We're working on a good one.
It's different.
Yeah, I'll see if I can't get it up in the next week or so.
But it'd be good.
And yes, I promise I'll put more videos on there.
Oh, promise.
Yeah.
You heard that folks.
I love him beyond just the podcast.
I promise.
There you go.
The vague promise, by the way.
I'll put more videos on that's at one.
Yeah.
Tell her you two videos.
And of course,
if you're into t-shirts, go to Jockels door or rashguards.
Who's the thing about the rashguards?
I'm not a scientist officially, but you know, the 19% improvement of performance.
If you wear the rashguards, that we, it's starting to look like that is factual.
Yeah.
So, what do you call it?
Not proven, but what do you call it?
Confirmed.
UFC fighter.
Nine-year veteran.
Currently fighting.
In the UFC.
Confirmed.
I don't get tell.
But if anyone can tell, he can tell.
Mediable.
Scientific.
Why don't you say his name?
Because while I'm saying this, I'm contemplating, should I say, name is coal miller.
Yeah, we know who it is.
The man, the coal.
Co-miller did confirm.
Yep.
That his due-jitsu was 19% better.
On the map.
Confirmed.
And again, that's, you know, if you were going to be doing some kind of a scientific experiment, you'd want some kind of a doctor.
Yes.
You know, somebody with a PhD.
Some of them expert.
You got your expert right there.
You got coal miller.
Six jutsu by the way.
Yeah.
He's no one.
He sees it.
He feels 19%.
Yep.
Proof.
He's training with, he was training with a rolling.
Yeah.
There.
There's a few people.
I trained with him one time in that.
And hotliner.
Yeah.
That was like the first time I ever went into a place.
And I walked in.
I was like, hey man, I just want to train.
And he looks like, oh, rolling, rolling, rolling, rolling,
Kornier, I think.
And he's in UFC too.
But I should get his hand.
And this was like 10 years ago or something.
I should get his hand.
I was like, hey man, good to meet you.
I'm just here to train.
Can I train on your mats?
And he's like, yeah.
Are you a back belt?
He asked me that.
And I was like, yeah, yeah.
I am.
I don't know how he could tell.
Right.
But he just told you do.
Yeah.
He's like, your back belt is a, yeah, man.
My back belt.
Let's do this.
But he's a awesome guy too.
Man.
I'm a super nice guy.
But hopefully maybe we need to get him a rash card too.
Yeah, man.
And that's not just for GGT, that's for, you know, whatever.
Any physical activity that you need some, some, what he called range of motion.
Mm-hmm.
That that if that means something to you get the rash card.
It looks dope too.
For people who have a certain level of aesthetic standard for those of you that care.
Yeah, about that kind of stuff.
I know.
Yeah, you know, you're here to win.
Yeah.
I mean, I did it, man.
I did it in respect for that.
But in the event of you caring what you look like.
We've got many, many compliments on the look of the rash card.
So just look at it.
Jockels store.com.
If you look at the rash card, look at the shirts.
If you like them, go ahead get one.
You can support that way.
Yeah, that's good.
Then they gave him.
You don't need to donate money.
Just look at them.
If you like them, go ahead get one.
There you go.
Well, if you get one, you got a buy one.
Of course, but I'm just saying.
Okay.
If you like, how they looked in the boom,
if you like what they say,
how they make you feel better.
Go ahead and do that, right?
Or if you just straight up need 19% improvement in your juice.
You gave them to get one.
Or if you just need a t-shirt.
But that's true.
Oh, we have hoodies too.
By the way, coming out one, two weeks, two more weeks.
One more week?
Whatever.
I'm gonna light it with a good one.
For these.
All right.
Yeah, some patches coming out to you some velcro stuff.
Just, yeah, there's some good stuff on there.
Check it out if you like.
Cool.
You might have some tea.
I know.
We do have, we do have Jocquay tea.
And I'm gonna tell you, we didn't expect Jocquay tea to sell like crazy.
No, I'm gonna look at this.
But it's so, you guys all that are listening this.
You guys got after it.
And all the way tea is gone.
Luckily, I apologize for that number one.
And you know what, they took it completely off a Amazon.
They pulled it down.
Yeah.
I just went to, because I was gonna, I was gonna tweet out some of the awesome reviews.
Did it got, yeah.
Sorry.
Like people that are now dead lifting 8,000 pounds by the way.
No, it's the fact, guys review it.
Yeah, he said he is, his deadlift went from 405, you know, 405 pounds to 8,000 pounds with Jocquay tea.
So there you have it.
That's worth it in his own right.
So you know, you always say, on its supplementation is good.
I don't see if, you know, a 7,500 pound improvement.
So yeah, so the Jocquay tea is sold out right now, but by the, well, there's more coming.
And depending on when you're listening this, this is, what is today October 15th?
Yes, it's October 15th.
So right now it's sold out.
It'll be back in full stock.
And not only do we have the 10, the deluxe 10 that you can buy, but in, you're going to also be able to buy a reload just a box with a 100 pound in there.
And some people, someone wrote a bad review on Amazon.
Good.
And they said, hey, your price is too high.
Bro, I love, I love the podcast, but you can't sell me this Jocquay tea for this amount of money.
That's not cool.
And so I talked to my tea people.
Sure.
And I said, tea people.
Emily, our price is too high.
What are we going to do about this?
And she said, well, your price is high because you wanted to get this special, hard core 10 to serve it in.
And I was like, well, yeah, because we make, you know, we believe in quality, right?
Sure.
And so we want to have something that is like tough.
So we got the 10.
And she said, well, that 10 cost a bunch of money to make and get sent over here and all this other stuff and I said, okay, well, how can we make a cheaper so we got a box with a 100 in it up the volume lower the price.
So now no one's going to be able to complain about the price because it's going to be on a par with any other white tea.
Except for it's going to make you be able to deadlift a thousand pounds.
Yeah, that's a winaway.
Which is definitely worth it.
I pay for premium price.
So it's good to go.
Yeah.
So check out the Jockel White tea and it's, it did sell out and read it sold out.
This costs people were buying it.
They bought one and then they bought five more because it's good to taste so good.
And people are drinking it.
Prejuge it to drinking it in the morning, drinking it before a test.
They're just drinking it all the time. It just tastes good. It replaces every other substance you need to drink.
Pretty soon.
So soon you're going to go out to a club and there's people going to be like, oh, get a good drink.
Sir, you're going to take a chocolate white tea.
Okay, they're going to have it on tap.
What's this?
Interesting.
You called the tin.
What do you call it?
Deluxe or luxury?
Do you call it something?
Durable?
I saw you.
No, I think you said like luxury or something.
Premium.
Love.
I don't know.
Something like that.
We'll play back to tape nonetheless.
This is like a bunker more.
It's not like.
Oh, yeah.
Well, we don't make things really.
We'll call it a workforce.
That's a reinforced team.
And what's cool is guess what holds the pen on my desk now.
Yeah.
One of these.
Guess what holds a bunch of nails out my garage.
That is hard.
Remember when I told you the other day, I like things that have dual purpose.
I'm going to do something else with it.
Yeah.
There you go.
Uh, there's a little book.
You can get it.
It's called a tree ownership.
It's about combat leadership.
If you liked the podcast, check out the book.
And also you can check out the audio book that
Lave Babin who wrote the book with me.
You, we read it.
So it's just more of us talking.
Check it out.
That's a tree ownership.
And also, of course, if you feel
like you want to keep talking to echo Charles and I,
you can believe it or not.
You can just do it.
You can talk to us.
We're there.
And we're on the interwebs.
And if you're on the interwebs and we're on the interwebs,
that means we can communicate.
Little thing called Twitter.
On Twitter.
Echo is at echo Charles.
I am at Jocca Willink.
And remember when I said I was going to back off Twitter,
I've been home lying on Twitter.
Yeah.
I'm not going to be a journalist.
But I am just hammered when I get what I do is when I travel.
I travel.
I got a sitting in an airport.
No, I'm not going to walk around in circles.
I don't watch movies.
No.
I either read for the podcast or I hammered Twitter.
So yeah, that's what's going on.
That's good to do for obviously for obvious reasons.
But it kind of keeps you informed.
That's like, you know,
a lot of people follow you.
So if you get a certain amount of people following,
you can't respond to everything.
You can't read.
So a lot of times people will be like,
hey, let me hire someone to do that.
Yeah, or hey,
I'm not going to spend more time on there or whatever because I'm too busy.
So instead of just maybe,
they'll just be completely not shown.
Yeah, they'll post stuff and then just kind of be it.
That'll be it.
But Paul, you're in touch now.
You know what's going on.
Yeah.
I've got a lot of good feedback.
I got a lot of good questions.
Yeah.
Got a lot of good questions.
And so that's worth it.
So if you want to, yeah,
Twitter, Instagram, and that's a piece of book.
We're both on there as well.
And that is kind of where we're at with this whole gig.
Now,
I guess to close it out tonight,
since we don't have time for questions.
You know,
I just want to say thanks to everybody for listening.
Thanks for everybody.
All the feedback that you're giving me.
Hey, I'm here in so much from first of all,
military guys,
military service members that are out getting after it.
Guys overseas right now that are crushing the enemy.
Godspeed,
keep getting after it.
Stay aggressive.
Absolutely.
Stay safe.
To police officers, which I hear a ton from back here.
You guys, thanks for what you do.
Thanks for keeping us safe.
I can't even imagine having that job to be honest with you.
I can't imagine having that job.
I don't have the temperament for that job.
It's not, it's not for me.
And for those of you that do that job,
stay strong.
I know it's hard times right now.
A lot of risk out there.
A lot of aggressiveness of you guys are,
you know,
extremely precarious position.
Every single day,
by the way,
every single call,
every single moment.
So,
thank you for what you do.
Firefighters,
of course,
same thing.
You guys getting after it.
And just running towards fire,
right?
That's overcoming an instinct.
That's what you do for a living.
So thank you for what you do.
Then of course,
we have all the workforce out there.
That is building and creating things
and making things happen.
And you are grinding,
and you are building it,
you're a world,
and you're building our world.
And so thank you for doing that.
And of course,
and most important,
as you roll through,
and as you continue,
think about wooden leg,
think about living hard,
think about holding the line,
think about being vigilant,
and stay,
stay uncomfortable,
stay true,
and stay forward,
forward of the decay,
and you do that
by getting out there,
getting after it.
So, until next time,
this is echo and jockel,
out.